The APC plan for Ghana

Our nation is in crisis ­ a crisis created by the previous New Patriotic Party (NPP) administration and sustained by the poor policies of the Mahama Administration. Economic conditions are worsening by the day and there is so much suffering in the land. But Ghana doesn't have to be like this ­ Ghana deserves better!

When elected, the APC will be committed to a different kind of government, one that governs in the national interest, not for private gain. As Presidential Candidate of the PNC in 2012 and APC in 2016, I have travelled across the length and breadth of this country and felt the pain and sacrifices made by ordinary Ghanaians everyday:

I feel for the farmer who struggles to feed his family and send his children to school ­ but doesn't know whether having made that sacrifice to pay the bills his children will even be able get a job at the end of their studies

I feel for the mother of the sick child, who has to walk miles to the clinic to get medicine only to be turned away because they won't accept her NHIS card & she has no money to pay

I feel for the youth who has worked hard at school or University but still can't find a job when they leave, who becomes a street hawker or
even opens a roadside shop, but finds they struggle to survive because the falling cedi raises the costs of their goods, or their shop
closes because they can't afford the electricity bill

It is for all these people that I ask Ghanaians to vote for the APC and Hassan Ayariga as President.

My vision for Ghana is that of an optimistic, self-confident and a prosperous nation with a strong and thriving a democratic society in which mutual trust and economic opportunities exists for all irrespective of their background.

The next APC Government will place people at its centre by making people indeed matter; their hopes and their concerns must drive its policies and priorities. Hassan Ayariga does not offer you the earth, I cannot solve every problem in your life, but what I can promise you is a Ghana that works and gives each and everyone of us, the opportunity to improve or better our lives.

I can promise you a Ghana that works for you and your family, not for the rich and powerful. I can promise you that I will be a President for all Ghanaians, whatever your region, your tribe or your religion, whether you vote for me or not ­ I will govern for you. I can promise to champion your cause, and that every day I wake up as President my first and only consideration will be what is best for the country we all love and what will improve the lives of all our people.

This manifesto is a reflection of the long-cherished vision of a comprehensive alternative for the forward march of our country. I respectfully ask Ghanaians to vote for the APC on December 7th 2016.

Long Live our homeland Ghana!

CHAPTER 1
A STRONG ECONOMY MATTERS

A strong economy shapes the business environment (for e.g. lower taxes), creates new opportunities, inspires more people to start new businesses, and encourages existing businesses to make new investments, leading to more, and better-paying jobs. When people prosper, the peace is largely secured. The Government's own direct job creation initiatives also depends on a strong economy.

Efficient delivery of Social Services (NHIS, Schools, Roads & Transport Network, Affordable Housing, Stable and Affordable Electric Power etc) also requires a strong economy. Unfortunately, the economy is not in great shape as there is widespread hardship and suffering. The National Democratic Congress (NDC) Government, and John Mahama, just as the previous NPP administration have been bad stewards of the economy, and our finances.

Why do we say so?

1. Economic growth (GDP) declined from 9.1% in 2008 to 3.2% in 2016.

2. Agriculture growth declined from 7.4% in 2008 to 2.8% by 2015.

3. Our Food Import Bill has increased dramatically from US$600,000 in 2008 to $2.1 billion in 2015. For example, rice imports rose from 395,400mt in 2008 to over 600,000mt in 2015.

4. Agricultural Extension Services have crumbled: it is understaffed (there is a hiring embargo) and under-resourced.

5. The Mass Cocoa Spraying Exercise has fallen short of expectation and cocoa production has subsequently declined.

6. Manufacturing in 2013 and 2014 recorded negative growth of -0.5% in 2015 according to revised figures of the GSS.

7. Unemployment is rising. In particular, every 1 out of 2 young person is unemployed (World Bank estimates: 48%)

8. Years of DUMSOR by the NPP and the NDC has collapsed businesses and wrecked the economy. The government is short of money to meet obligations for gas supplies from Nigeria. Electricity tariffs, thanks to high taxes and corrupt procurement of power generation, are now amongst the highest in the world.

9. Ghana's total interest payments has increased to GHC10.5 billion in 2016. Six times Ghana's oil revenue is now needed to pay one year's interest on the debt.

10. Years of mismanagement by both the NPP and the NDC has pushed the banking system to dangerously fragile levels with rising state-owned enterprise (SOE) debts, and the debts owed by government to the bulk oil distribution companies (BDCs) and the lack of adequate supervision of microfinance companies, all mean that the level of non-performing loans (NPLs) is at 19.3% in May 2016.

11. Bank lending rates have increased and the situation where banks used to chase customers to come for loans has almost disappeared. Today, banks would much rather, and do lend to government and not to the private sector.

12. The exchange rate which stood at GHS1.20 to the US dollar at the end of 2008 has depreciated to GHS4.0 to the US dollar today. This depreciation was a product of the strange decision by the NPP administration to re-denominate the cedi.

13. Teacher training allowances have been cancelled.

14. Nursing training allowances have been cancelled.

15. Nurses and health assistants are not being posted after completion of their courses.

16. Drivers and transport operators have seen a dramatic rise in the costs of insurances, spare parts, license fees, DVLA charges, and fuel.

17. Taxes on businesses have increased dramatically and new taxes have been introduced. For example increases in capital gains tax (from 10% to 25%) withholding tax services (from 15% to 20%) and the introduction of ­ Energy levy (10%), VAT on electricity (17.5%), VAT of financial services (17.5%), Special Import levy, etc. Taxes have also been introduced on Ambulances and bicycles.

18. Government expenditure on infrastructure has declined considerably from an average of 11.5% GDP between 2001 and 2008 to 5.7% of GDP between 2009 and 2015. Capital expenditure is even lower at 4.2% of GDP in 2016.

19. Economic mismanagement has resulted in Ghana turning to the IMF for a bailout and to restore policy credibility. However, the IMF programme has not delivered much, even though Ghana's rating has been upgraded by the internationally renowned rating agency Moody's.

20. The NHIS has collapsed.

21. The free maternal care system is also in crisis.

22. In spite of the NDC government trying to blame the dire state of the economy on the global economy, for the third successive year Ghana could not achieve even one of the ten West Africa Monetary Zone (WAMZ) convergence criteria. Even for the six (6) Macro-economic Convergence Criteria such as inflation, external reserves, central bank financing, fiscal deficit, tax/GDP ratio and exchange rate stability, Ghana scored zero out of the six and placed us last in the last in the table of nations including the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea, and Nigeria.

23. The average growth rates of Ghana's UNDP Human Development Index (a measure of progress in education and health) has declined from 1.33 (between 2000 ­ 2010) to 1.13 (between 2010 ­ 2014).

Impact of NPP and NDC Mismanagement and Corruption on the Welfare of Ghanaians

For the vast majority of Ghanaians, the toxic mixture of NPP and NDC's poor record and corruption over the years has resulted in an explosion of suffering in the country:

* Teachers are suffering

* Teacher trainees are suffering

* Nurses are suffering

* Nursing trainees are suffering

* Patients are suffering

* Traders are suffering

* Pensioners are suffering

* Drivers are suffering

* Contractors are suffering

* Civil servants are suffering

* Farmers are suffering
 
* Fishermen are suffering

* Industries are suffering

* Artisans are suffering

* Kayayei are suffering

* Men are suffering

* Women are suffering

* Ghanaians are suffering

APC's POLICY OBJECTIVES

Our Policy Goal For The Economy Is Simple: To Build A Strong, Business And People-Friendly Economy That Will Create Jobs and Prosperity For All Ghanaians.
The overall vision of the APC is the creation of an optimistic, self-confident and a prosperous nation through the creative exploitation of our core competencies, and operating within a democratic and transparent society in which mutual trust and economic opportunities exist for all.

The APC will ensure that growth is socially responsible, and comes from genuine value addition, and not from stripping our natural resources or from underpaying our Labour.
The goal of the APC is to build a country with the following characteristics:

* A prosperous population with a high quality of life.

* A stable, peaceful and firmly united nation.

* A solid and efficient good governance machinery and strong institutions.

* A well-educated population that strives for excellence, and

* A competitive economy that is capable of producing sustainable growth, jobs and shared benefits for all.

The first transformation Ghanaians will witness is the transformation from inability under John Mahama's NDC to star performance under the APC with Dr. Hassan Ayariga.

We will use the resources of the country to build an inclusive economy where every village or community has access to a minimum set of basic amenities and opportunities.

The APC will put in place policies to achieve the following:

* Jobs for all

* Senior High School education for all

* Electricity for all

* Water for all

* Toilets for all
 
* Telephone network coverage for all

* NHIS (not cash and carry) for all

CHAPTER 2

"JOBS FOR ALL": APC's PLAN FOR CREATING WELL-PAYING JOBS
FOR ALL GHANAIANS ESPECIALLY THE YOUTH.

The number one priority for the APC government will be to put in place the policy framework for the creation of well-paying, decent jobs and entrepreneurship opportunities for Ghanaians. The agenda for job creation would be underpinned by (but not limited to) the following:

* Pursuing aggressive industrialization and value-addition to agricultural produce.

* Providing tax and related incentives for manufacturing businesses in sectors such as agro-processing, light industries, pharmaceutical,
petrochemicals, garments and textiles, etc.

* Reliable and cost effective energy supply,

* Reducing interest rates,

* Reducing the cost of doing business

* Stabilizing the Cedi
 
* Skills training and apprenticeships

* Promoting exports

1. Job Creation through Industrialization
Ghana's industrial sector is facing significant challenges. These include the following Business Financing, Cost of Doing Business, Export Development, Energy for Industry, Entrepreneurship and Business Development, Industrial Development Initiatives, Domestic Trade and Consumer Protection, Trade Facilitation, Interest Rates, Stabilize the exchange rate of the Cedi.

To address these challenges, the APC will, among others:

i. Recapitalize the National Investment Bank and establish an Industrial Development Fund too provide fiancé for industrialization.

ii. Restructure general taxes and duties on business to reduce pre-production costs, including removing import duties on raw materials and machinery for selected strategic industries, reducing taxes on electricity consumption, eliminating the Special Import Levy, abolishing the VAT on financial services and on real estate sales, re-introducing the 3% VAT Flat Rate for micro and small enterprises.

iii. Offer tax credit incentives to businesses that employ fresh graduates.

iv. Support the operations of the Ghana EXIM Bank to facilitate access to financing for export development and restructure the operations of the Export Promotion Authority to enhance export diversification.

v. Completely eradicate DUMSOR ­ the current unreliable electricity supply crisis, re-orient energy tariff policy to reduce the burden on businesses. We will not adopt the tot, tot approach of I will fix it, I will fix it. We will eradicate it completely

vi. Promote the supply of energy in support of production-related activities, create dedicated quality and reliable energy supply sources for industrial enclaves and zones, and provide incentive schemes for the development of specific renewable energy projects for industrial development.

vii. Merge the NBSSI, the Youth Employment Agency (YEA), the Youth Enterprise Support Fund (YES), and Rural Enterprises Project (REP) to consolidate government resources in the provision of entrepreneurship training and business development services.

viii. Provide specific incentives for the production and supply of quality, locally-produced non-agricultural raw materials for industry at competitive prices.

ix. Provide a comprehensive programme of support for the cultivation of selected agricultural products as raw materials for agro-processing tomato, cassava, cocoa, maize, oil palm, cashew, cotton, selected fruits, groundnuts, rice etc.

x. Partner private local and foreign investors to develop large scale strategic anchor industries to serve as growth poles for the economy

­ Petrochemical, Iron and Steel, Cement, Aluminium, Salt, Vehicle Assembly, Manufacturing of Machinery, Equipment and Machine Parts, Agro-processing, Garments and textiles, Assembly of electronics, light machinery etc.

xi. Facilitate access to dedicated land spaces in every Region for the establishment of multi-purpose industrial parks, sector specific industrial enclaves, and enterprise free zones.

xii. Establish apprenticeship and skills development centres to train skilled labour force for specific industrial sectors.

xiii. In partnership with the private sector, APC will transform the apprenticeship training model from a supply-driven approach to a market-demand model based on the German apprenticeship model.

xiv. Create an information portal and set up a task force to assist our youth and artisans in making their products and services visible on a
local, national and global scale.

xv. Develop a National Industrial Sub-contracting Exchange to link SMEs with large scale enterprises.

xvi. Support relevant law enforcement agencies to ensure strict compliance with existing legislation and regulations in respect of retail trade.

xvii. Introduce reform to make Ghana's ports the most efficient in Africa.

xviii. Establish an independent Port Clearing Facilitation Agency as a one-stop institutional support mechanism for import and export trade.

xix. Restructure the Customs Division of the Ghana Revenue Authority to optimize its operational efficiency.

xx. Restore and maintain macroeconomic stability through fiscal discipline.

xxi. Pass a Fiscal Responsibility Act.

xxii. Reduce government borrowing to make more money available for banks to lend to the private sector to reduce interest rates, and

xxiii. Formalize the economy through the establishment of a national database, using the National Identification System as the primary identifier, with linkages to the databases of institutions such as the Police, NHIS, Passport Office, Immigration, Courts, Ghana Revenue Authority, and DVLA and

xxiv. Stabilize the exchange rate of the Cedi.

2. Other Job Creating Initiatives

i. Greening Jobs:

APC will target 300,000 hectares of degraded areas over the next ten years, within and outside forest reserves, for restoration and plantation development using fast growing indigenous and exotic species by:

* Establishing an Environmental Public Employment
Programme to create employment by engaging in
activities which have documented environmental benefits.
* Implementing a phased approach to forest restoration through improving low-stocked and/or, degraded natural forests using the Farm Forest Model in Ghana, where community members plant food crops like plantain alongside trees and maintain them in forest reserves until the tree canopy closes.

ii. Support to Indigenous Quarry Operations:

We will provide tax incentives for the importation of quarry equipment as well as the establishment of credit lines to enable the industry acquire state-of-the-art technology.

iii. Attracting FDIs into labour intensive sector
APC will promote greater integration within the global economy and encourage Foreign Direct Investment, especially in labour intensive sectors.

iv. Developing the housing market:

The housing market represents a significant opportunity to create lots of jobs and we will focus on the sector as one of the prime areas to keep Ghanaians employed. The housing market is perhaps one of the most labour intensive sectors and serves as a critical cornerstone for an economy that seeks to win the war against unemployment. A properly functioning mortgage market will lead to openings for ­ plumbers, masons, carpenters, surveyors, architects, tilers, roofers, welders, electricians, painters, etc.
Ghana unbelievably has the highest mortgage to income ratio in the world! Something is definitely wrong. The APC will facilitate the development of an active mortgage market by accelerating the registration of land titles, and releasing the over $50 billion of dead capital currently projected to be locked up in land because of the inability of owners to collateralize land for credit due to lack of clear title.

v. Enforcing local content laws:

APC will enforce local content provisions by developing efficient and competitive local supplier networks for the goods and services that industry needs and that can realistically be
sourced locally.

vi. Employing already trained essential workers:

We will facilitate the work placement of already-trained nurses, public health personnel and teachers, who remain unemployed under the NDC. Ours is a holistic approach to job creation. Therefore, the job creation strategies outlined in this section of the manifesto are by no means an exhaustive list. Other information on job creation can be found in the subsequent chapters dealing with sectors of the economy.

CHAPTER 3
ENERGY AND PETROLEUM

1. Energy

The energy sector has been badly managed by both the NPP and NDC over the years. The poor management of the sector has been characterized by generation shortfalls, corrupt procurements, frequent power cuts, inefficiencies and unsustainable debts. These problems have led to years of "DUMSOR" and brought devastation to our industries particularly small businesses. Dumsor has also caused job losses, income losses, unnecessary deaths, disrupted life and destroyed countless electrical appliances of businesses and homes.

As a matter of priority, the APC will work towards paying off VRA's debts, and reorganizing its management to ensure it focuses on its mandate. The APC's industrial plan is anchored on available, reliable and affordable energy services. We will develop an "Energy Economy" that will ensure that all Ghanaian homes and industries have access to an adequate, reliable, affordable and environmentally sustainable supply of energy to meet their needs and that this reliable energy supply will support the accelerated growth and development agenda we envisage for Ghana.

a. APC will end "DUMSOR" in the short-term through government liquidity injection, restructuring of debts, and securing of firm commitments for the reliable supply of fuel.

b. We will reduce taxes on electricity tariffs to provide immediate relief to households and industry.

c. We will develop and implement a 10-year Power Sector Master Plan to meet our medium to long-term energy needs.

d. We will conduct a technical audit on all power sector infrastructure.

e. We will develop and implement an Energy Sector Financial Restructuring and Recovery Plan, incorporating, a liquidity management mechanism for VRA, ECG, NED and the BDCs.

f. We will increase the proportion of renewable energy ­ solar, biomass, mini-hydro, wind and waste-to-energy in the national generation mix.

g. We will explore the possibility of geothermal and tidal wave energy.

h. We will rapidly move to the adoption of a distributed solar energy solution for all government and public buildings.

i. We will ensure that there is sufficient Reserve Margin ­ the safety cushion we need to prevent blackouts ­ to ensure the stability of the system.

j. We will create an environment of clear policies, rules and regulations, and provide adequate price incentives to attract private sector investments.

k. We will aggressively pursue energy conservation and the efficient use of energy including reduction of transmission losses.

l. We will ensure that energy is produced and used in an environmentally sound manner.

m. We will restructure the power sector by bringing all hydro generation exclusively under VRA and create a thermal subsidiary.

2. Petroleum

Ghana poured first oil in 2009. Seven years on, many Ghanaians have lost hope for the promise of oil. Ghana's oil industry is not attracting enough investors despite the substantial de-risking of some of our oil basins. Inexperienced and unknown companies are holding exclusive oil rights in our basins, most of whom are not fulfilling their work obligations. In the downstream sector, the NDC government's failure to finance petroleum subsidies occasioned by exchange losses and manipulations of the automatic price adjustment formula have led to huge accumulation of debts by the Bulk Distribution Companies (BDCs), some of which can no longer raise letters of credit to support petroleum importation.

The APC commits to a transparent, accountable and efficient management of Ghana's petroleum resources for the benefit of all Ghanaians, as follows:

Petroleum Upstream

The APC will:
a. issue regulations for the operationalization of transparency measures in the management of the oil and gas resources; including for example on licensing of oil blocs, disclosure of oil contracts and beneficial ownership information of oil companies among others. Our commitment to passing the Right to Information Bill will further enhance transparency in the oil and gas sector;

b. create an enabling environment through fiscal and non-fiscal measures to attract domestic and foreign investments in oil and gas exploration;

c. accelerate oil exploration in the Northern sector of Ghana as part of the Voltarian Basin development as well as in the Keta and Accra
Basins;

d. transform Takoradi into a sub-regional Oil Service hub with a first class port facility;

e. empower local firms to progressively play active roles in the oil and gas value chain through capacity development, financing and partnership support;

f. aggressively invest in education and skills enhancement of Ghanaians to manage the oil and gas sector under an "Accelerated Oil Capacity Development Programme";

g. create jobs in high impact areas such as fabrication and installation, manufacturing of equipment and parts and the construction of oil and
gas infrastructure;

h. restructure the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation to focus on its core mandate, improve on its corporate governance and to become a
national vehicle for maximizing the value of our oil and gas resources.

Petroleum Downstream

The APC will:

a. support the growth of local competition by redeeming government obligation to the Bulk Distribution Companies;

b. address macroeconomic instability to ensure the effective implementation of the petroleum price deregulation policy;

c. expand the Tema Oil Refinery;

d. ensure the Bulk Oil Storage and Transportation Company focusses on its core mandate of protecting our strategic petroleum reserves;

e. facilitate the establishment of an oil refinery in Takoradi;

f. review and amend the Petroleum Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815), to support investment of revenue from oil in high-impact
strategic social and economic infrastructure;

g. allocate revenue from oil to infrastructure, education and agriculture between 2017 and 2020;

h. leverage oil revenue to complete the Accra-Paga railway line and Western railway line between Takoradi and Accra within four years;

i. insulate the national budget against crude oil price volatility by strengthening the budget stabilization mechanisms.

CHAPTER 4
MODERNISING AGRICULTURE AND LEVERAGING IT FOR
JOB CREATION AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

Agriculture continues to be the anchor of Ghana's economy, employing more than half of our workforce. Growth in this sector has declining over the years under both the NPP and NDC. Food is unnecessarily expensive in a country that is blessed with fertile land. Our production methods are not modern and income levels of participants in this sector remain low, thus making it unattractive for the youth as a sustainable means of livelihood.

The APC's vision for the next four years is to modernize agriculture to improve production efficiency, achieve food security and profitability aimed at significantly increasing agricultural productivity. We will also seek to add value to our raw agricultural produce and develop new and stable markets for our products.

The APC will improve production efficiency through:

1. Improved Seeds and Fertilizers.

2. Irrigation Development.

3. Staffing and Resourcing Extension Services.

4. Invest in Research & Development by establishing an Agricultural Transformation Agency to coordinate the development of new
technologies.

5. Establishing mechanization centres across the country to provide services to farmers at competitive prices.

Mechanization Companies

The APC shall depoliticize the sale or supply of farm machinery to individuals. Instead, our administration shall facilitate and encourage the establishment of plant pools of farm machinery by the private sector to be sited at appropriate locations to provide prompt and timely services to farmers at approved rate. As part of the methodology of our food production policy, mechanization companies shall plough the farms of the various cooperatives groups and their accounts credited with the cost of ploughing by the banks upon certification by agriculture extension officers.

6. Facilitating Commercial and Block farming.
The APC will give special attention, and focus on developing selected products as follows:

1. Grains: Our targeted grains will be maize, millet, sorghum, rice and soya beans.

2. Cassava: Cassava will be farmed on a large scale for commercial and industrial purposes.

3. Oil Palm, Coffee, Cashew, Cotton and Shea: We will organize producers under Producers' Associations to facilitate the provision of technical support and finance. Value addition to these products will be promoted and facilitated.

Shea nut

More than 600,000 women in Northern Ghana depend on incomes from the sales of shea butter and other shea-related products. Further, shea butter production has the potential of evolving into a
viable export industry since private businesses in several countries have been expressing their interest in importing product. The Shea-nut industry shall be given a boost to play a major role in the economy development. We shall develop large plantations of Shea-nut trees, so that pickers will no longer depend on the wild Shea-nut trees only.

4. Horticultural crops: We will promote production based on commercial farms and with outgrowers to support exports.

5. Cocoa: We will reactivate and expand the mass spraying programmes, replant old cocoa farms with high-yielding and disease-resistant plants and reintroduce the cocoa swollen shoot disease control programme.

6. Livestock: We will establish Livestock Development Centres in the three agro-climatic zones of Ghana to promote sedentary system of production of cattle and small ruminants like sheep and goats. We will also enact and enforce laws to regulate nomadism limiting grazing to fenced in areas designated as fodder/grazing banks for cattle.

7. Fisheries: We will subsidize premix fuel, eliminate import duties for fishing equipment like nets and outboard motors, enforce the fisheries management policies embodied in the Fisheries Act 625 of 2002, ensure that pair trawling and other illegal and unapproved fishing methods are eliminated in our territorial waters, put local Fishing Cooperatives in charge of subsidized inputs through local designated outlets, and promote the local production of fishing nets.

8. Poultry: We will institute anti-dumping measures on poultry, support the private sector to expand local production of poultry products, support efficient production of both maize and soya beans, encourage local processing, and facilitate the provision of credit lines.

The APC will critically improve on the storage, processing, and transportation of agricultural produce by:

1. Supporting selected products beyond the farm gate to incorporate post-harvest activities; including storage, transportation, processing, packaging and distribution.

2. Providing incentives to the private sector and District Assemblies to invest in post-harvest activities.

3. Facilitating the building of pack houses and storage facilities both on farms and on locations close to production centres.

4. Supporting small and medium scale agro-processing enterprises to acquire the appropriate technology and basic processing machinery.

5. Continuing to expand and upgrade the road infrastructure connecting production areas to marketing centres.

On marketing, our major focus is ensuring that food producers can be guaranteed buyers ad can obtain air and attractive prices for their products.

In this respect the APC will:

1. endeavour not only to expand existing, but also open up new domestic and export markets;

2. will use its purchasing power to create demand for locally-produced food items by ensuring that all food purchased with government funds are locally produced. For example, only domestically produced food will be used in our School Feeding Programme;

3. develop market support services for selected horticulture, food and industrial crops to enhance production for export;

4. establish and support Marketing Companies similar to the Ghana Cocoa Board.

CHAPTER 5
THE GROWING TOGETHER PROJECT: RE-ORIENTING CAPITAL EXPENDITURE TO RURAL COMMUNITIES, INNER CITIES COASTAL FISHING COMMUNITIES AND ZONGOS

Between 2017 and 2020, the APC will aggressively pursue policies that will be targeted at particular segments of our population who continue to be socially excluded and as such miss the myriad of opportunities that abound not only in Ghana, but also in today's world.

The Growing Together Project consists of five major, interlinked transformational initiatives designed to take giant leaps in transforming Ghana, particularly in investing in rural and deprived communities in a major effort at inclusive development of all parts of the country, and adopting a localized development approach.

This includes:

* The restructuring of "SADA" to Northern Accelerated Development Authority (NADA). This will cover, and focus on the traditional three regions in the north of the country, namely Northern, Upper West, and Upper East Regions.

* The establishment of the Midlands Development Authority (MDA) which will serve as the main development agency for the middle belt of the country, covering the non-coastal areas of the Volta and Western Regions, in addition to the Ashanti, Eastern, and the Brong Ahafo Regions.

* The establishment of the Central Development Authority (CDA) that will invest in, and serve as the main develop0ment agency for communities along all the coastal areas in Ghana, including the coastal areas of Volta and Western Regions, in addition to the Greater Accra and Central regions.

* The establishment of the Slum & Inner City Improvement Programme(Special Zongo Improvement Initiative) to serve as a special vehicle to focus development on communities in the zongos and Inner Parts of Cities across Ghana, and

* Increase the share of revenues that mining communities currently receive in royalty payments. The APC will make sure that mining communities receive a higher share. Currently 80% of the royalty goes to government, 10% to the minerals commission, and 10% to the community. The APC will reduce Government share to 70% while doubling the community share of 20%. This will ensure more value is retained in mining communities for development.

Together, these five programmes under the Growing Together Project will be strictly monitored and focused to implement key decentralized plans of action to tap the enormous resources ­ human, natural and capital, boost key sectors in the various zones and develop the much needed infrastructure and amenities, all focused at stimulating production and jobs in these areas and making such zones economically viable.

CHAPTER 6

GOVERNANCE, CORRUPTION AND PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY

The fundamental requirement for development is the quality of leadership ­ good leadership ­ which requires that we must have good governance in order for qualitative leadership to emerge and function.

The APC is irrevocably committed to the establishment of a solid and efficient good governance machinery comprising of accountable
governance, respect for the rule of law and respect for human rights.
We will ensure that democracy and accountable governance, as a system of governance, as a system of governance, becomes entrenched in Ghana
to the benefit of all its citizens. To realize this the APC will deepen the culture of good governance, fight corruption, and ensure public accountability by:

* Upholding and promoting the separation of powers and independence of the judiciary by resourcing them and strengthening of the institutional capacity of Parliament.

* Promoting and instilling within the state security agencies, an enhanced ethic culture of respect for rights and freedoms of citizens.

* Nominating women for appointment to at least 30% of available public office positions.

* Ensuring regular interaction between the President and the People.

* Ensuring that citizens and public bodies are fully aware of their respective duties and rights in the delivery of public service and empower the citizens to demand the level of service to which they are entitled.

* Review the legal regulatory and institutional frame work for Anti-corruption Agencies.

* Reform laws to set time limitations within which an appointing authority must fill any vacancy or confirm a person acting in that
watchdog role institution.

* Ensure the passage of the Freedom of Information Bill.

* Ensure that public funds are spent on their intended purposes and the people of Ghana get value for money in public expenditure. We
will fight corruption head-on through preventive, detective, corrective and punitive actions. The APC's anti-corruption policy will be based
on three key pillars: institutional reform, legislative reform, and attitudinal change/public education.

Some of the specific actions we will undertake under these pillars are:

Independent Prosecution:

The APC will establish an independent anti-corruption agency to investigate and prosecute certain categories of cases and allegations of corruption and other criminal wrongdoing, including those involving alleged violations of the Public Procurement Act and cases implicating political officeholders and politicians.

Parliamentary Oversight:

The APC will encourage parliamentary oversight of the Executive as part of our fight against corruption and report to Parliament on the potential liability of the State arising out of claims against the State.

Assets Declaration Regime:

We will foster a working environment for asset declaration that includes effective monitoring of asset declaration by amending the law to require the Auditor General to periodically publish the list of all persons so required under Chapter 24 of the Constitution who have declared or defaulted, and establishing a sanctions regime for non-declaration within the stipulated timeframe which will include forfeiture of appointment, in the case of political appointees.

Statutory funds:

The APC will transfer without delay all statutory funds to designated agencies like the GETFund, National Health Insurance Authority etc, when they are collected, a stipulated by law.

* Amending the relevant sections of the Criminal and Other Offences Act (1960) Act 29, particularly sections 239 ­ 257, to make corruption
a felony rather than a misdemeanor;

* Reforming laws to set time limitations within which an appointing authority must fill any vacancy or conform a person acting in that
office where that institution has a watchdog role.

* Introducing legislation to improve prevention, detection, reporting, investigations and prosecution;

* Adopting legislative measures that will operationalize the relevant articles on corruption in the UN Convention Against Corruption;

* Establishing a publicly accessible Beneficial Ownership Disclosure (BDO) Directory in Ghana;

* Establishing the Office of the Special Prosecutor.

* Strengthening institutions such as Parliament, CHRAJ, EOCO, Audit Service, Ghana Revenue Authority, Parliament, Judicial Service,
Financial Intelligence Centre, Ghana Police Service and the Attorney-General's Department and resource them sufficiently to be effective.

* Ensuring the strict enforcement of the existing Procurement Laws.

* Establishing a transaction price database which will be periodically reviewed to conform to market trends.

* Resourcing the Auditor General's Office to set up a Procurement Audit Unit to deal with procurement;

* Establishing a Forensic Audit Unit (FAU) with the Ghana Audit Service to conduct value for money audits with the view to detecting and prosecuting corrupt practices.

* Ensuring the implementation of Audit and Parliamentary Accounts Committee recommendations.

* Bringing to an end the prevailing impunity regime where people found to have stolen or fraudulently benefited from public funds are merely requested by the Attorney General to refund same on their own terms.

* Resourcing the NCCE to provide public education and sensitization on the negative effects of corruption as well as initiate and sustain a national conversation on the values that should shape our transformation as a country. This should strengthen the citizen's resolve to resist, condemn and report corruption and demand
accountability, and

* Finally, the APC in government will sponsor the establishment of an interactive website for public reporting of corrupt practices in accordance with the Whistle Blower's Act.

CHAPTER 7
LOCAL GOVERNMENT

We are committed to bringing governance to the doorstep of the people.

The APC will focus on effective and efficient decentralization through greater grassroots participation, better planning and improved service
delivery in local communities. An APC government will undertake the following measures to ensure that local governance and decentralization is enhanced.

Political Decentralization

* Oversea the direct election of Metropolitan, Municipal and District Chief Executives (MMDCEs) within 24 months of election into office to coincide with the next District Assembly elections in 2019.

* Improve allowances paid to assembly members.

Local Government Service and Capacity Building

* We will take a second look at the Local Government system to ensure that local level action is not stifled by top-heavy bureaucratic
institutions especially in recruitment and procurement.

Fiscal Decentralization

Ensure that fiscal decentralization is fully implemented through the following initiatives:

Decentralized Departments
Gender and Children Departments under Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection and the Land Valuation Board will be captured as decentralized departments of the MMDAs.

Sanitation Management

The APC will ensure the consolidation of all existing national sanitation policies, plans and programmes into a Comprehensive National Sanitation Programme and Action Plan.

We will establish a National Sanitation Fund to fund this Action Plan.

Sources of the fund shall include:

* Allocation from the Consolidated Fund.

* Contribution from sanitation related industries.
 
* Sanitation related fines.

We will also promote recycling of refuse through the use of incentive packages.

CHAPTER 8
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Our Foreign policy will be one of the key agents of Ghana's socio-economic resurgence. We will improve on the efficiency and effectiveness of our
foreign missions and redirect emphasis to the search for economic opportunities with the view to opening markets for Ghanaian goods while attracting foreign investments into the Ghanaian economy.

Economic Diplomacy

The APC will prioritize the development of economic opportunities in our foreign policy. We will open up markets abroad for Ghanaian goods and services and attract foreign investments.

Democracy and Foreign Affairs

We will support democracy and the growing trend towards democratization in all parts of the world especially in Africa. We will support improvements in democratic governance. Rule of law, civil rights and political freedoms everywhere. We remain committed to our membership of the ECOWAS, the African Union, the Commonwealth, and the UN.

Multilateralism in Foreign Affairs

We will welcome opportunities at the international level to demonstrate in our diplomatic relations that a smaller country like Ghana can defend its national interests, maintain its sovereign independence, and take decisions with its more powerful friends, partners and allies without deferring to them.

Ghana and ECOWAS

The APC government will encourage all groupings within the region to harmonize their objectives and operations with a view to eventually facilitating the achievements of a united and strong West Africa.

Ghana and the African Union

The APC believes in the Africa Union (AU). We will do all in our power to make the Union work more efficiently and purposefully for the advancement of the African continent and its people. We will lead the effort to create the African Continental Free Trade Area (ACFTA).

Ghana and the Commonwealth

Ghana's ties to the governments and people of the Commonwealth are based on shared democratic values; history, language and common interests and we will not waiver in upholding the tenets of the Commonwealth of Nations. Our continued membership of the Commonwealth will help foster greater international understanding and maximize our benefits through economic and technical cooperation and enhanced international peace and security.

Ghana and the International Organization of La Francophonie

We will strengthen our ties with members of the International Organization of La Francophonie as a means of broadening our global reach in promoting our culture, tourism and trade relations.

Ghana and the United Nations Organization

We will work hard at the UN to create a climate of ideas supportive of national development, particularly in Africa and in the countries of the south, in areas such as international finance, debt relief, trade, health improvement and market access in the developed world for developed countries.

Ghanaians Living Abroad

A significant aspect of our foreign policy will be the promotion and support for the welfare of Ghanaians living in the diaspora. We will endeavour to avail all our nationals living abroad due access to all provisions of the law to which they are entitled. Rather than treating Ghanaians in the diaspora as second class citizens, the government of the APC would put in place a policy framework that would encourage those who may or may not have acquired other citizenships to bring their skills (and those of their children) back home to assist in the development of our country. We shall expand further the opportunities that will allow the Ghanaian living abroad to participate fully in our national discourse and benefit fully from the advantages this nation has to offer.

In furtherance of this, the Diaspora Affairs Bureau will be moved from the Foreign Ministry to the Office of the President to coordinate all matters affecting Ghanaians in the diaspora.