The APC plan for Ghana

Our nation is in crisis ­ a crisis created by the previous New Patriotic Party (NPP) administration and sustained by the poor policies of the Mahama Administration. Economic conditions are worsening by the day and there is so much suffering in the land. But Ghana doesn't have to be like this ­ Ghana deserves better!

When elected, the APC will be committed to a different kind of government, one that governs in the national interest, not for private gain. As Presidential Candidate of the PNC in 2012 and APC in 2016, I have travelled across the length and breadth of this country and felt the pain and sacrifices made by ordinary Ghanaians everyday:

I feel for the farmer who struggles to feed his family and send his children to school ­ but doesn't know whether having made that sacrifice to pay the bills his children will even be able get a job at the end of their studies

I feel for the mother of the sick child, who has to walk miles to the clinic to get medicine only to be turned away because they won't accept her NHIS card & she has no money to pay

I feel for the youth who has worked hard at school or University but still can't find a job when they leave, who becomes a street hawker or
even opens a roadside shop, but finds they struggle to survive because the falling cedi raises the costs of their goods, or their shop
closes because they can't afford the electricity bill

It is for all these people that I ask Ghanaians to vote for the APC and Hassan Ayariga as President.

My vision for Ghana is that of an optimistic, self-confident and a prosperous nation with a strong and thriving a democratic society in which mutual trust and economic opportunities exists for all irrespective of their background.

The next APC Government will place people at its centre by making people indeed matter; their hopes and their concerns must drive its policies and priorities. Hassan Ayariga does not offer you the earth, I cannot solve every problem in your life, but what I can promise you is a Ghana that works and gives each and everyone of us, the opportunity to improve or better our lives.

I can promise you a Ghana that works for you and your family, not for the rich and powerful. I can promise you that I will be a President for all Ghanaians, whatever your region, your tribe or your religion, whether you vote for me or not ­ I will govern for you. I can promise to champion your cause, and that every day I wake up as President my first and only consideration will be what is best for the country we all love and what will improve the lives of all our people.

This manifesto is a reflection of the long-cherished vision of a comprehensive alternative for the forward march of our country. I respectfully ask Ghanaians to vote for the APC on December 7th 2016.

Long Live our homeland Ghana!

Chapter 1
A STRONG ECONOMY MATTERS

A strong economy shapes the business environment (for e.g. lower taxes), creates new opportunities, inspires more people to start new businesses, and encourages existing businesses to make new investments, leading to more, and better-paying jobs. When people prosper, the peace is largely secured. The Government's own direct job creation initiatives also depends on a strong economy.

Efficient delivery of Social Services (NHIS, Schools, Roads & Transport Network, Affordable Housing, Stable and Affordable Electric Power etc) also requires a strong economy. Unfortunately, the economy is not in great shape as there is widespread hardship and suffering. The National Democratic Congress (NDC) Government, and John Mahama, just as the previous NPP administration have been bad stewards of the economy, and our finances.

Why do we say so?

1. Economic growth (GDP) declined from 9.1% in 2008 to 3.2% in 2016.

2. Agriculture growth declined from 7.4% in 2008 to 2.8% by 2015.

3. Our Food Import Bill has increased dramatically from US$600,000 in 2008 to $2.1 billion in 2015. For example, rice imports rose from 395,400mt in 2008 to over 600,000mt in 2015.

4. Agricultural Extension Services have crumbled: it is understaffed (there is a hiring embargo) and under-resourced.

5. The Mass Cocoa Spraying Exercise has fallen short of expectation and cocoa production has subsequently declined.

6. Manufacturing in 2013 and 2014 recorded negative growth of -0.5% in 2015 according to revised figures of the GSS.

7. Unemployment is rising. In particular, every 1 out of 2 young person is unemployed (World Bank estimates: 48%)

8. Years of DUMSOR by the NPP and the NDC has collapsed businesses and wrecked the economy. The government is short of money to meet obligations for gas supplies from Nigeria. Electricity tariffs, thanks to high taxes and corrupt procurement of power generation, are now amongst the highest in the world.

9. Ghana's total interest payments has increased to GHC10.5 billion in 2016. Six times Ghana's oil revenue is now needed to pay one year's interest on the debt.

10. Years of mismanagement by both the NPP and the NDC has pushed the banking system to dangerously fragile levels with rising state-owned enterprise (SOE) debts, and the debts owed by government to the bulk oil distribution companies (BDCs) and the lack of adequate supervision of microfinance companies, all mean that the level of non-performing loans (NPLs) is at 19.3% in May 2016.

11. Bank lending rates have increased and the situation where banks used to chase customers to come for loans has almost disappeared. Today, banks would much rather, and do lend to government and not to the private sector.

12. The exchange rate which stood at GHS1.20 to the US dollar at the end of 2008 has depreciated to GHS4.0 to the US dollar today. This depreciation was a product of the strange decision by the NPP administration to re-denominate the cedi.

13. Teacher training allowances have been cancelled.

14. Nursing training allowances have been cancelled.

15. Nurses and health assistants are not being posted after completion of their courses.

16. Drivers and transport operators have seen a dramatic rise in the costs of insurances, spare parts, license fees, DVLA charges, and fuel.

17. Taxes on businesses have increased dramatically and new taxes have been introduced. For example increases in capital gains tax (from 10% to 25%) withholding tax services (from 15% to 20%) and the introduction of ­ Energy levy (10%), VAT on electricity (17.5%), VAT of financial services (17.5%), Special Import levy, etc. Taxes have also been introduced on Ambulances and bicycles.

18. Government expenditure on infrastructure has declined considerably from an average of 11.5% GDP between 2001 and 2008 to 5.7% of GDP between 2009 and 2015. Capital expenditure is even lower at 4.2% of GDP in 2016.

19. Economic mismanagement has resulted in Ghana turning to the IMF for a bailout and to restore policy credibility. However, the IMF programme has not delivered much, even though Ghana's rating has been upgraded by the internationally renowned rating agency Moody's.

20. The NHIS has collapsed.

21. The free maternal care system is also in crisis.

22. In spite of the NDC government trying to blame the dire state of the economy on the global economy, for the third successive year Ghana could not achieve even one of the ten West Africa Monetary Zone (WAMZ) convergence criteria. Even for the six (6) Macro-economic Convergence Criteria such as inflation, external reserves, central bank financing, fiscal deficit, tax/GDP ratio and exchange rate stability, Ghana scored zero out of the six and placed us last in the last in the table of nations including the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea, and Nigeria.

23. The average growth rates of Ghana's UNDP Human Development Index (a measure of progress in education and health) has declined from 1.33 (between 2000 ­ 2010) to 1.13 (between 2010 ­ 2014).

Impact of NPP and NDC Mismanagement and Corruption on the Welfare of Ghanaians

For the vast majority of Ghanaians, the toxic mixture of NPP and NDC's poor record and corruption over the years has resulted in an explosion of suffering in the country:

* Teachers are suffering

* Teacher trainees are suffering

* Nurses are suffering

* Nursing trainees are suffering

* Patients are suffering

* Traders are suffering

* Pensioners are suffering

* Drivers are suffering

* Contractors are suffering

* Civil servants are suffering

* Farmers are suffering
 
* Fishermen are suffering

* Industries are suffering

* Artisans are suffering

* Kayayei are suffering

* Men are suffering

* Women are suffering

* Ghanaians are suffering

APC's POLICY OBJECTIVES

Our Policy Goal For The Economy Is Simple: To Build A Strong, Business And People-Friendly Economy That Will Create Jobs and Prosperity For All Ghanaians.
The overall vision of the APC is the creation of an optimistic, self-confident and a prosperous nation through the creative exploitation of our core competencies, and operating within a democratic and transparent society in which mutual trust and economic opportunities exist for all.

The APC will ensure that growth is socially responsible, and comes from genuine value addition, and not from stripping our natural resources or from underpaying our Labour.
The goal of the APC is to build a country with the following characteristics:

* A prosperous population with a high quality of life.

* A stable, peaceful and firmly united nation.

* A solid and efficient good governance machinery and strong institutions.

* A well-educated population that strives for excellence, and

* A competitive economy that is capable of producing sustainable growth, jobs and shared benefits for all.

The first transformation Ghanaians will witness is the transformation from inability under John Mahama's NDC to star performance under the APC with Dr. Hassan Ayariga.

We will use the resources of the country to build an inclusive economy where every village or community has access to a minimum set of basic amenities and opportunities.

The APC will put in place policies to achieve the following:

* Jobs for all

* Senior High School education for all

* Electricity for all

* Water for all

* Toilets for all
 
* Telephone network coverage for all

* NHIS (not cash and carry) for all

Chapter 2

"JOBS FOR ALL": APC's PLAN FOR CREATING WELL-PAYING JOBS
FOR ALL GHANAIANS ESPECIALLY THE YOUTH.

The number one priority for the APC government will be to put in place the policy framework for the creation of well-paying, decent jobs and entrepreneurship opportunities for Ghanaians. The agenda for job creation would be underpinned by (but not limited to) the following:

* Pursuing aggressive industrialization and value-addition to agricultural produce.

* Providing tax and related incentives for manufacturing businesses in sectors such as agro-processing, light industries, pharmaceutical,
petrochemicals, garments and textiles, etc.

* Reliable and cost effective energy supply,

* Reducing interest rates,

* Reducing the cost of doing business

* Stabilizing the Cedi
 
* Skills training and apprenticeships

* Promoting exports

1. Job Creation through Industrialization
Ghana's industrial sector is facing significant challenges. These include the following Business Financing, Cost of Doing Business, Export Development, Energy for Industry, Entrepreneurship and Business Development, Industrial Development Initiatives, Domestic Trade and Consumer Protection, Trade Facilitation, Interest Rates, Stabilize the exchange rate of the Cedi.

To address these challenges, the APC will, among others:

i. Recapitalize the National Investment Bank and establish an Industrial Development Fund too provide fiancé for industrialization.

ii. Restructure general taxes and duties on business to reduce pre-production costs, including removing import duties on raw materials and machinery for selected strategic industries, reducing taxes on electricity consumption, eliminating the Special Import Levy, abolishing the VAT on financial services and on real estate sales, re-introducing the 3% VAT Flat Rate for micro and small enterprises.

iii. Offer tax credit incentives to businesses that employ fresh graduates.

iv. Support the operations of the Ghana EXIM Bank to facilitate access to financing for export development and restructure the operations of the Export Promotion Authority to enhance export diversification.

v. Completely eradicate DUMSOR ­ the current unreliable electricity supply crisis, re-orient energy tariff policy to reduce the burden on businesses. We will not adopt the tot, tot approach of I will fix it, I will fix it. We will eradicate it completely

vi. Promote the supply of energy in support of production-related activities, create dedicated quality and reliable energy supply sources for industrial enclaves and zones, and provide incentive schemes for the development of specific renewable energy projects for industrial development.

vii. Merge the NBSSI, the Youth Employment Agency (YEA), the Youth Enterprise Support Fund (YES), and Rural Enterprises Project (REP) to consolidate government resources in the provision of entrepreneurship training and business development services.

viii. Provide specific incentives for the production and supply of quality, locally-produced non-agricultural raw materials for industry at competitive prices.

ix. Provide a comprehensive programme of support for the cultivation of selected agricultural products as raw materials for agro-processing tomato, cassava, cocoa, maize, oil palm, cashew, cotton, selected fruits, groundnuts, rice etc.

x. Partner private local and foreign investors to develop large scale strategic anchor industries to serve as growth poles for the economy

­ Petrochemical, Iron and Steel, Cement, Aluminium, Salt, Vehicle Assembly, Manufacturing of Machinery, Equipment and Machine Parts, Agro-processing, Garments and textiles, Assembly of electronics, light machinery etc.

xi. Facilitate access to dedicated land spaces in every Region for the establishment of multi-purpose industrial parks, sector specific industrial enclaves, and enterprise free zones.

xii. Establish apprenticeship and skills development centres to train skilled labour force for specific industrial sectors.

xiii. In partnership with the private sector, APC will transform the apprenticeship training model from a supply-driven approach to a market-demand model based on the German apprenticeship model.

xiv. Create an information portal and set up a task force to assist our youth and artisans in making their products and services visible on a
local, national and global scale.

xv. Develop a National Industrial Sub-contracting Exchange to link SMEs with large scale enterprises.

xvi. Support relevant law enforcement agencies to ensure strict compliance with existing legislation and regulations in respect of retail trade.

xvii. Introduce reform to make Ghana's ports the most efficient in Africa.

xviii. Establish an independent Port Clearing Facilitation Agency as a one-stop institutional support mechanism for import and export trade.

xix. Restructure the Customs Division of the Ghana Revenue Authority to optimize its operational efficiency.

xx. Restore and maintain macroeconomic stability through fiscal discipline.

xxi. Pass a Fiscal Responsibility Act.

xxii. Reduce government borrowing to make more money available for banks to lend to the private sector to reduce interest rates, and

xxiii. Formalize the economy through the establishment of a national database, using the National Identification System as the primary identifier, with linkages to the databases of institutions such as the Police, NHIS, Passport Office, Immigration, Courts, Ghana Revenue Authority, and DVLA and

xxiv. Stabilize the exchange rate of the Cedi.

2. Other Job Creating Initiatives

i. Greening Jobs:

APC will target 300,000 hectares of degraded areas over the next ten years, within and outside forest reserves, for restoration and plantation development using fast growing indigenous and exotic species by:

* Establishing an Environmental Public Employment
Programme to create employment by engaging in
activities which have documented environmental benefits.
* Implementing a phased approach to forest restoration through improving low-stocked and/or, degraded natural forests using the Farm Forest Model in Ghana, where community members plant food crops like plantain alongside trees and maintain them in forest reserves until the tree canopy closes.

ii. Support to Indigenous Quarry Operations:

We will provide tax incentives for the importation of quarry equipment as well as the establishment of credit lines to enable the industry acquire state-of-the-art technology.

iii. Attracting FDIs into labour intensive sector
APC will promote greater integration within the global economy and encourage Foreign Direct Investment, especially in labour intensive sectors.

iv. Developing the housing market:

The housing market represents a significant opportunity to create lots of jobs and we will focus on the sector as one of the prime areas to keep Ghanaians employed. The housing market is perhaps one of the most labour intensive sectors and serves as a critical cornerstone for an economy that seeks to win the war against unemployment. A properly functioning mortgage market will lead to openings for ­ plumbers, masons, carpenters, surveyors, architects, tilers, roofers, welders, electricians, painters, etc.
Ghana unbelievably has the highest mortgage to income ratio in the world! Something is definitely wrong. The APC will facilitate the development of an active mortgage market by accelerating the registration of land titles, and releasing the over $50 billion of dead capital currently projected to be locked up in land because of the inability of owners to collateralize land for credit due to lack of clear title.

v. Enforcing local content laws:

APC will enforce local content provisions by developing efficient and competitive local supplier networks for the goods and services that industry needs and that can realistically be
sourced locally.

vi. Employing already trained essential workers:

We will facilitate the work placement of already-trained nurses, public health personnel and teachers, who remain unemployed under the NDC. Ours is a holistic approach to job creation. Therefore, the job creation strategies outlined in this section of the manifesto are by no means an exhaustive list. Other information on job creation can be found in the subsequent chapters dealing with sectors of the economy.

Chapter 3
ENERGY AND PETROLEUM

1. Energy

The energy sector has been badly managed by both the NPP and NDC over the years. The poor management of the sector has been characterized by generation shortfalls, corrupt procurements, frequent power cuts, inefficiencies and unsustainable debts. These problems have led to years of "DUMSOR" and brought devastation to our industries particularly small businesses. Dumsor has also caused job losses, income losses, unnecessary deaths, disrupted life and destroyed countless electrical appliances of businesses and homes.

As a matter of priority, the APC will work towards paying off VRA's debts, and reorganizing its management to ensure it focuses on its mandate. The APC's industrial plan is anchored on available, reliable and affordable energy services. We will develop an "Energy Economy" that will ensure that all Ghanaian homes and industries have access to an adequate, reliable, affordable and environmentally sustainable supply of energy to meet their needs and that this reliable energy supply will support the accelerated growth and development agenda we envisage for Ghana.

a. APC will end "DUMSOR" in the short-term through government liquidity injection, restructuring of debts, and securing of firm commitments for the reliable supply of fuel.

b. We will reduce taxes on electricity tariffs to provide immediate relief to households and industry.

c. We will develop and implement a 10-year Power Sector Master Plan to meet our medium to long-term energy needs.

d. We will conduct a technical audit on all power sector infrastructure.

e. We will develop and implement an Energy Sector Financial Restructuring and Recovery Plan, incorporating, a liquidity management mechanism for VRA, ECG, NED and the BDCs.

f. We will increase the proportion of renewable energy ­ solar, biomass, mini-hydro, wind and waste-to-energy in the national generation mix.

g. We will explore the possibility of geothermal and tidal wave energy.

h. We will rapidly move to the adoption of a distributed solar energy solution for all government and public buildings.

i. We will ensure that there is sufficient Reserve Margin ­ the safety cushion we need to prevent blackouts ­ to ensure the stability of the system.

j. We will create an environment of clear policies, rules and regulations, and provide adequate price incentives to attract private sector investments.

k. We will aggressively pursue energy conservation and the efficient use of energy including reduction of transmission losses.

l. We will ensure that energy is produced and used in an environmentally sound manner.

m. We will restructure the power sector by bringing all hydro generation exclusively under VRA and create a thermal subsidiary.

2. Petroleum

Ghana poured first oil in 2009. Seven years on, many Ghanaians have lost hope for the promise of oil. Ghana's oil industry is not attracting enough investors despite the substantial de-risking of some of our oil basins. Inexperienced and unknown companies are holding exclusive oil rights in our basins, most of whom are not fulfilling their work obligations. In the downstream sector, the NDC government's failure to finance petroleum subsidies occasioned by exchange losses and manipulations of the automatic price adjustment formula have led to huge accumulation of debts by the Bulk Distribution Companies (BDCs), some of which can no longer raise letters of credit to support petroleum importation.

The APC commits to a transparent, accountable and efficient management of Ghana's petroleum resources for the benefit of all Ghanaians, as follows:

Petroleum Upstream

The APC will:
a. issue regulations for the operationalization of transparency measures in the management of the oil and gas resources; including for example on licensing of oil blocs, disclosure of oil contracts and beneficial ownership information of oil companies among others. Our commitment to passing the Right to Information Bill will further enhance transparency in the oil and gas sector;

b. create an enabling environment through fiscal and non-fiscal measures to attract domestic and foreign investments in oil and gas exploration;

c. accelerate oil exploration in the Northern sector of Ghana as part of the Voltarian Basin development as well as in the Keta and Accra
Basins;

d. transform Takoradi into a sub-regional Oil Service hub with a first class port facility;

e. empower local firms to progressively play active roles in the oil and gas value chain through capacity development, financing and partnership support;

f. aggressively invest in education and skills enhancement of Ghanaians to manage the oil and gas sector under an "Accelerated Oil Capacity Development Programme";

g. create jobs in high impact areas such as fabrication and installation, manufacturing of equipment and parts and the construction of oil and
gas infrastructure;

h. restructure the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation to focus on its core mandate, improve on its corporate governance and to become a
national vehicle for maximizing the value of our oil and gas resources.

Petroleum Downstream

The APC will:

a. support the growth of local competition by redeeming government obligation to the Bulk Distribution Companies;

b. address macroeconomic instability to ensure the effective implementation of the petroleum price deregulation policy;

c. expand the Tema Oil Refinery;

d. ensure the Bulk Oil Storage and Transportation Company focusses on its core mandate of protecting our strategic petroleum reserves;

e. facilitate the establishment of an oil refinery in Takoradi;

f. review and amend the Petroleum Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815), to support investment of revenue from oil in high-impact
strategic social and economic infrastructure;

g. allocate revenue from oil to infrastructure, education and agriculture between 2017 and 2020;

h. leverage oil revenue to complete the Accra-Paga railway line and Western railway line between Takoradi and Accra within four years;

i. insulate the national budget against crude oil price volatility by strengthening the budget stabilization mechanisms.

Chapter 4
MODERNISING AGRICULTURE AND LEVERAGING IT FOR
JOB CREATION AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

Agriculture continues to be the anchor of Ghana's economy, employing more than half of our workforce. Growth in this sector has declining over the years under both the NPP and NDC. Food is unnecessarily expensive in a country that is blessed with fertile land. Our production methods are not modern and income levels of participants in this sector remain low, thus making it unattractive for the youth as a sustainable means of livelihood.

The APC's vision for the next four years is to modernize agriculture to improve production efficiency, achieve food security and profitability aimed at significantly increasing agricultural productivity. We will also seek to add value to our raw agricultural produce and develop new and stable markets for our products.

The APC will improve production efficiency through:

1. Improved Seeds and Fertilizers.

2. Irrigation Development.

3. Staffing and Resourcing Extension Services.

4. Invest in Research & Development by establishing an Agricultural Transformation Agency to coordinate the development of new
technologies.

5. Establishing mechanization centres across the country to provide services to farmers at competitive prices.

Mechanization Companies

The APC shall depoliticize the sale or supply of farm machinery to individuals. Instead, our administration shall facilitate and encourage the establishment of plant pools of farm machinery by the private sector to be sited at appropriate locations to provide prompt and timely services to farmers at approved rate. As part of the methodology of our food production policy, mechanization companies shall plough the farms of the various cooperatives groups and their accounts credited with the cost of ploughing by the banks upon certification by agriculture extension officers.

6. Facilitating Commercial and Block farming.
The APC will give special attention, and focus on developing selected products as follows:

1. Grains: Our targeted grains will be maize, millet, sorghum, rice and soya beans.

2. Cassava: Cassava will be farmed on a large scale for commercial and industrial purposes.

3. Oil Palm, Coffee, Cashew, Cotton and Shea: We will organize producers under Producers' Associations to facilitate the provision of technical support and finance. Value addition to these products will be promoted and facilitated.

Shea nut

More than 600,000 women in Northern Ghana depend on incomes from the sales of shea butter and other shea-related products. Further, shea butter production has the potential of evolving into a
viable export industry since private businesses in several countries have been expressing their interest in importing product. The Shea-nut industry shall be given a boost to play a major role in the economy development. We shall develop large plantations of Shea-nut trees, so that pickers will no longer depend on the wild Shea-nut trees only.

4. Horticultural crops: We will promote production based on commercial farms and with outgrowers to support exports.

5. Cocoa: We will reactivate and expand the mass spraying programmes, replant old cocoa farms with high-yielding and disease-resistant plants and reintroduce the cocoa swollen shoot disease control programme.

6. Livestock: We will establish Livestock Development Centres in the three agro-climatic zones of Ghana to promote sedentary system of production of cattle and small ruminants like sheep and goats. We will also enact and enforce laws to regulate nomadism limiting grazing to fenced in areas designated as fodder/grazing banks for cattle.

7. Fisheries: We will subsidize premix fuel, eliminate import duties for fishing equipment like nets and outboard motors, enforce the fisheries management policies embodied in the Fisheries Act 625 of 2002, ensure that pair trawling and other illegal and unapproved fishing methods are eliminated in our territorial waters, put local Fishing Cooperatives in charge of subsidized inputs through local designated outlets, and promote the local production of fishing nets.

8. Poultry: We will institute anti-dumping measures on poultry, support the private sector to expand local production of poultry products, support efficient production of both maize and soya beans, encourage local processing, and facilitate the provision of credit lines.

The APC will critically improve on the storage, processing, and transportation of agricultural produce by:

1. Supporting selected products beyond the farm gate to incorporate post-harvest activities; including storage, transportation, processing, packaging and distribution.

2. Providing incentives to the private sector and District Assemblies to invest in post-harvest activities.

3. Facilitating the building of pack houses and storage facilities both on farms and on locations close to production centres.

4. Supporting small and medium scale agro-processing enterprises to acquire the appropriate technology and basic processing machinery.

5. Continuing to expand and upgrade the road infrastructure connecting production areas to marketing centres.

On marketing, our major focus is ensuring that food producers can be guaranteed buyers ad can obtain air and attractive prices for their products.

In this respect the APC will:

1. endeavour not only to expand existing, but also open up new domestic and export markets;

2. will use its purchasing power to create demand for locally-produced food items by ensuring that all food purchased with government funds are locally produced. For example, only domestically produced food will be used in our School Feeding Programme;

3. develop market support services for selected horticulture, food and industrial crops to enhance production for export;

4. establish and support Marketing Companies similar to the Ghana Cocoa Board.

Chapter 5
THE GROWING TOGETHER PROJECT: RE-ORIENTING CAPITAL EXPENDITURE TO RURAL COMMUNITIES, INNER CITIES COASTAL FISHING COMMUNITIES AND ZONGOS

Between 2017 and 2020, the APC will aggressively pursue policies that will be targeted at particular segments of our population who continue to be socially excluded and as such miss the myriad of opportunities that abound not only in Ghana, but also in today's world.

The Growing Together Project consists of five major, interlinked transformational initiatives designed to take giant leaps in transforming Ghana, particularly in investing in rural and deprived communities in a major effort at inclusive development of all parts of the country, and adopting a localized development approach.

This includes:

* The restructuring of "SADA" to Northern Accelerated Development Authority (NADA). This will cover, and focus on the traditional three regions in the north of the country, namely Northern, Upper West, and Upper East Regions.

* The establishment of the Midlands Development Authority (MDA) which will serve as the main development agency for the middle belt of the country, covering the non-coastal areas of the Volta and Western Regions, in addition to the Ashanti, Eastern, and the Brong Ahafo Regions.

* The establishment of the Central Development Authority (CDA) that will invest in, and serve as the main develop0ment agency for communities along all the coastal areas in Ghana, including the coastal areas of Volta and Western Regions, in addition to the Greater Accra and Central regions.

* The establishment of the Slum & Inner City Improvement Programme(Special Zongo Improvement Initiative) to serve as a special vehicle to focus development on communities in the zongos and Inner Parts of Cities across Ghana, and

* Increase the share of revenues that mining communities currently receive in royalty payments. The APC will make sure that mining communities receive a higher share. Currently 80% of the royalty goes to government, 10% to the minerals commission, and 10% to the community. The APC will reduce Government share to 70% while doubling the community share of 20%. This will ensure more value is retained in mining communities for development.

Together, these five programmes under the Growing Together Project will be strictly monitored and focused to implement key decentralized plans of action to tap the enormous resources ­ human, natural and capital, boost key sectors in the various zones and develop the much needed infrastructure and amenities, all focused at stimulating production and jobs in these areas and making such zones economically viable.

Chapter 6

GOVERNANCE, CORRUPTION AND PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY

The fundamental requirement for development is the quality of leadership ­ good leadership ­ which requires that we must have good governance in order for qualitative leadership to emerge and function.

The APC is irrevocably committed to the establishment of a solid and efficient good governance machinery comprising of accountable
governance, respect for the rule of law and respect for human rights.
We will ensure that democracy and accountable governance, as a system of governance, as a system of governance, becomes entrenched in Ghana
to the benefit of all its citizens. To realize this the APC will deepen the culture of good governance, fight corruption, and ensure public accountability by:

* Upholding and promoting the separation of powers and independence of the judiciary by resourcing them and strengthening of the institutional capacity of Parliament.

* Promoting and instilling within the state security agencies, an enhanced ethic culture of respect for rights and freedoms of citizens.

* Nominating women for appointment to at least 30% of available public office positions.

* Ensuring regular interaction between the President and the People.

* Ensuring that citizens and public bodies are fully aware of their respective duties and rights in the delivery of public service and empower the citizens to demand the level of service to which they are entitled.

* Review the legal regulatory and institutional frame work for Anti-corruption Agencies.

* Reform laws to set time limitations within which an appointing authority must fill any vacancy or confirm a person acting in that
watchdog role institution.

* Ensure the passage of the Freedom of Information Bill.

* Ensure that public funds are spent on their intended purposes and the people of Ghana get value for money in public expenditure. We
will fight corruption head-on through preventive, detective, corrective and punitive actions. The APC's anti-corruption policy will be based
on three key pillars: institutional reform, legislative reform, and attitudinal change/public education.

Some of the specific actions we will undertake under these pillars are:

Independent Prosecution:

The APC will establish an independent anti-corruption agency to investigate and prosecute certain categories of cases and allegations of corruption and other criminal wrongdoing, including those involving alleged violations of the Public Procurement Act and cases implicating political officeholders and politicians.

Parliamentary Oversight:

The APC will encourage parliamentary oversight of the Executive as part of our fight against corruption and report to Parliament on the potential liability of the State arising out of claims against the State.

Assets Declaration Regime:

We will foster a working environment for asset declaration that includes effective monitoring of asset declaration by amending the law to require the Auditor General to periodically publish the list of all persons so required under Chapter 24 of the Constitution who have declared or defaulted, and establishing a sanctions regime for non-declaration within the stipulated timeframe which will include forfeiture of appointment, in the case of political appointees.

Statutory funds:

The APC will transfer without delay all statutory funds to designated agencies like the GETFund, National Health Insurance Authority etc, when they are collected, a stipulated by law.

* Amending the relevant sections of the Criminal and Other Offences Act (1960) Act 29, particularly sections 239 ­ 257, to make corruption
a felony rather than a misdemeanor;

* Reforming laws to set time limitations within which an appointing authority must fill any vacancy or conform a person acting in that
office where that institution has a watchdog role.

* Introducing legislation to improve prevention, detection, reporting, investigations and prosecution;

* Adopting legislative measures that will operationalize the relevant articles on corruption in the UN Convention Against Corruption;

* Establishing a publicly accessible Beneficial Ownership Disclosure (BDO) Directory in Ghana;

* Establishing the Office of the Special Prosecutor.

* Strengthening institutions such as Parliament, CHRAJ, EOCO, Audit Service, Ghana Revenue Authority, Parliament, Judicial Service,
Financial Intelligence Centre, Ghana Police Service and the Attorney-General's Department and resource them sufficiently to be effective.

* Ensuring the strict enforcement of the existing Procurement Laws.

* Establishing a transaction price database which will be periodically reviewed to conform to market trends.

* Resourcing the Auditor General's Office to set up a Procurement Audit Unit to deal with procurement;

* Establishing a Forensic Audit Unit (FAU) with the Ghana Audit Service to conduct value for money audits with the view to detecting and prosecuting corrupt practices.

* Ensuring the implementation of Audit and Parliamentary Accounts Committee recommendations.

* Bringing to an end the prevailing impunity regime where people found to have stolen or fraudulently benefited from public funds are merely requested by the Attorney General to refund same on their own terms.

* Resourcing the NCCE to provide public education and sensitization on the negative effects of corruption as well as initiate and sustain a national conversation on the values that should shape our transformation as a country. This should strengthen the citizen's resolve to resist, condemn and report corruption and demand
accountability, and

* Finally, the APC in government will sponsor the establishment of an interactive website for public reporting of corrupt practices in accordance with the Whistle Blower's Act.

Chapter 7
LOCAL GOVERNMENT

We are committed to bringing governance to the doorstep of the people.

The APC will focus on effective and efficient decentralization through greater grassroots participation, better planning and improved service
delivery in local communities. An APC government will undertake the following measures to ensure that local governance and decentralization is enhanced.

Political Decentralization

* Oversea the direct election of Metropolitan, Municipal and District Chief Executives (MMDCEs) within 24 months of election into office to coincide with the next District Assembly elections in 2019.

* Improve allowances paid to assembly members.

Local Government Service and Capacity Building

* We will take a second look at the Local Government system to ensure that local level action is not stifled by top-heavy bureaucratic
institutions especially in recruitment and procurement.

Fiscal Decentralization

Ensure that fiscal decentralization is fully implemented through the following initiatives:

Decentralized Departments
Gender and Children Departments under Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection and the Land Valuation Board will be captured as decentralized departments of the MMDAs.

Sanitation Management

The APC will ensure the consolidation of all existing national sanitation policies, plans and programmes into a Comprehensive National Sanitation Programme and Action Plan.

We will establish a National Sanitation Fund to fund this Action Plan.

Sources of the fund shall include:

* Allocation from the Consolidated Fund.

* Contribution from sanitation related industries.
 
* Sanitation related fines.

We will also promote recycling of refuse through the use of incentive packages.

Chapter 8
FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Our Foreign policy will be one of the key agents of Ghana's socio-economic resurgence. We will improve on the efficiency and effectiveness of our
foreign missions and redirect emphasis to the search for economic opportunities with the view to opening markets for Ghanaian goods while attracting foreign investments into the Ghanaian economy.

Economic Diplomacy

The APC will prioritize the development of economic opportunities in our foreign policy. We will open up markets abroad for Ghanaian goods and services and attract foreign investments.

Democracy and Foreign Affairs

We will support democracy and the growing trend towards democratization in all parts of the world especially in Africa. We will support improvements in democratic governance. Rule of law, civil rights and political freedoms everywhere. We remain committed to our membership of the ECOWAS, the African Union, the Commonwealth, and the UN.

Multilateralism in Foreign Affairs

We will welcome opportunities at the international level to demonstrate in our diplomatic relations that a smaller country like Ghana can defend its national interests, maintain its sovereign independence, and take decisions with its more powerful friends, partners and allies without deferring to them.

Ghana and ECOWAS

The APC government will encourage all groupings within the region to harmonize their objectives and operations with a view to eventually facilitating the achievements of a united and strong West Africa.

Ghana and the African Union

The APC believes in the Africa Union (AU). We will do all in our power to make the Union work more efficiently and purposefully for the advancement of the African continent and its people. We will lead the effort to create the African Continental Free Trade Area (ACFTA).

Ghana and the Commonwealth

Ghana's ties to the governments and people of the Commonwealth are based on shared democratic values; history, language and common interests and we will not waiver in upholding the tenets of the Commonwealth of Nations. Our continued membership of the Commonwealth will help foster greater international understanding and maximize our benefits through economic and technical cooperation and enhanced international peace and security.

Ghana and the International Organization of La Francophonie

We will strengthen our ties with members of the International Organization of La Francophonie as a means of broadening our global reach in promoting our culture, tourism and trade relations.

Ghana and the United Nations Organization

We will work hard at the UN to create a climate of ideas supportive of national development, particularly in Africa and in the countries of the south, in areas such as international finance, debt relief, trade, health improvement and market access in the developed world for developed countries.

Ghanaians Living Abroad

A significant aspect of our foreign policy will be the promotion and support for the welfare of Ghanaians living in the diaspora. We will endeavour to avail all our nationals living abroad due access to all provisions of the law to which they are entitled. Rather than treating Ghanaians in the diaspora as second class citizens, the government of the APC would put in place a policy framework that would encourage those who may or may not have acquired other citizenships to bring their skills (and those of their children) back home to assist in the development of our country. We shall expand further the opportunities that will allow the Ghanaian living abroad to participate fully in our national discourse and benefit fully from the advantages this nation has to offer.

In furtherance of this, the Diaspora Affairs Bureau will be moved from the Foreign Ministry to the Office of the President to coordinate all matters affecting Ghanaians in the diaspora.

Chapter 9
EDUCATION
Societies that have made rapid progress around the world have all put education at the heart of their development. To be able to transform Ghana, therefore, it is important that our children and young people are equipped with the kind of education that places them at par with their peers across the globe. Ghana's children should have the education that ensures that they achieve their full potential, a holistic education that equips them with skill sets to make a full contribution to the development of Ghana and themselves. An education that looks beyond merely passing examinations but rather at building character, nurturing values and raising literate, confident and useful citizens that are equipped with critical thinking abilities is what the APC seeks to provide.

SECONDARY EDUCATION
* Free SHS

The APC will redefine basic education to include Senior High School (SHS) and make it available for free on a universal basis to all Ghanaian youth by 2019. The Senior High School system will be organized both as a terminal education for entry into the world of work, or a preparatory stage for entry into tertiary education or technical, vocational, or agricultural training.

* Vocation and Skill Training

Vocation and Skill training will be further developed under the APC by the building of two state-of-the-art institutions and the upgrading and revamping of existing technical and vocational institutions to ensure that our workforce has world-class employable skills.

TEACHERS

* We will pay serious attention to their professional development and work environment, restoring teacher's allowances, ensuring prompt payment of salaries and promoting teachers without undue delay. We will also focus on the provision of incentives that will not only motivate teachers, but reward their hard work in the classroom.

* We will collaborate with GNAT and NAGRAT and other teaching associations to facilitate an affordable housing scheme for teachers.

* We will ensure that teachers who upgrade their qualifications are promoted promptly and that their salary increases take immediate effect.

* The APC will ensure proper decentralization of teachers' recruitment and other document processing and relieve them of the frustrating,
bureaucratic processing of documents at the centre.

PRIMARY EDUCATION

We will reintroduce the History of Ghana as a subject for primary schools. To ensure that standards are improved and maintained across pre-tertiary education, the APC government will strengthen and equip the Inspectorate Division in order for it to carry out its mandate of inspecting and regulating the provision of good quality education whilst providing good value for
money in education.

SCIENCE AND MATHS EDUCATION

We will aggressively promote Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education across all levels of the education system. An APC government will leverage technology to popularize the teaching and learning of Mathematics. Children in every part of the country will have access to mathematics lessons delivered at the highest level. We aim to demystify mathematics and turn Ghana into a mathematics-friendly nation.

MISSION SCHOOLS

We will strengthen the participation of the Missions in the Mission-founded schools. We believe this will ensure the return of discipline and moral upbringing to our schools.

ARABIC EDUCATION

We will support Arabic/Islamic instructors with training and other incentives to motivate them to provide good training for our children. We will introduce Arabic as an optional language to be taught and examined at the JHS and SHS levels.

COUNSELING AND GUIDANCE

There will be an intense focus on providing effective and professional guidance and counselling services to pupils, students and young people to facilitate their personal growth and development.

SPORTS

The APC will provide sporting facilities and revive sporting competitions among schools not only for health purposes, but also as a career pathway for students, while fostering a spirit of competitiveness and teamwork.

INCLUSIVE EDUCATION

In terms of inclusive education, the APC will establish structures that ensure weaker children (and those with special needs) are not left behind, but rather are developed by a crop of teachers with the requisite skills in differentiated teaching methods.

ICT AND EDUCATION

The APC shall improve the facilities and curriculum for ICT education at all levels. We shall develop an online educational platform to host, stream, and share short videos of mini-lectures to classrooms or offices around the country. We shall ensure that all teachers have ICT competence.

The APC will introduce programming at the Junior and Senior High Levels in order to expand the capacity of our students in ICT and train them for the job opportunities that the sector offers.

TERTIARY EDUCATION

1. We will ensure that Colleges of Education have updated and relevant curricular to ensure graduates from these institutions are of similar quality to their peers trained anywhere in the world.

2. Teacher trainee allowances will be fully restored.

3. We will ensure the realignment of Polytechnics as Technical Universities to their original mandate of providing high level technical and vocational training to the Ghanaian workforce.

4. In addition to the Book and Research allowances for lecturers, the APC will establish a Research Fund to further facilitate research and innovation.

5. We will place an emphasis on the continuous linkage with industry and the world of work to ensure programme relevance, develop employable skills, and thereby reducing graduate unemployment.

EDUCATION CURRICULA

We will restructure the education curricula to teach and equip Ghanaians students with the relevant skill sets to meet the needs of industry and future opportunities.

We will reorient the educational curriculum at all levels, especially higher education, to impart the knowledge and attitudes needed to promote self-employment and entrepreneurship rather than salaried employment.

Chapter 10
HEALTH
APC 2017 ­ 2020 Priority Areas

The Health System in Ghana is a pivotal one for national development. The APC deeply recognizes that a wealthy nation is a healthy nation. In today's global village, global health concerns are national security issues.

Our APC manifesto seeks to position Ghana in a direction to comprehensively address local, national and emerging global earth concerns e.g. Zika and Ebola viruses and the increasing incidence of non-communicable diseases.

The APC broadly classifies our challenges into three priority areas.

* Global Health Concerns

* National Health Emergencies

* National Health concerns

To ensure that Ghana is a healthy nation, the APC will:

1. Rescue and Restructure the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS)

The NHIS has not been run well by both the NPP and the NDC. The APC government will revive the National Health Insurance Scheme to make it efficient, with capacity to finance health services on a timely basis in a bid to achieve universal health coverage for all Ghanaians by:

* Directing and strictly ceding all funds raised through the NHIA Levy into the healthcare sector, and to the activities that focus on quality patient treatment, medication, and care.

* Utilizing the best in technology and health insurance management protocols to tackle waste, corruption, and insurance claim fraud under
the NHIS.

* Improving efficiency to ensure limited resources are used prudently.

* Making sure existing hospitals and clinics are adequately supplied with basic drugs, gloves, syringes, oxygen, anti-snake serum etc.
many of which are not even available in some teaching hospitals.

* APC under Dr. Hassan Ayariga shall equip all regional and government hospitals with a dialysis unit and treatment will be free for NHIS card holders.

* Death certificate for Muslim bodies will be made available upon request without delay for immediate released to family members.

2. Address Sector Disparities

Supporting the manpower needs of the MMDAs and the overall healthcare sector by:

* Investing in the expansion and equipping of medical schools to train more medical doctors.

* Restoring trainee nurses' allowances in full.

* Streamlining the operations of and improving health-training institutions.

* Providing free specialist postgraduate training in our established postgraduate training institutions,

* Restoring and streamlining tax reliefs, abolished by the NDC government, which facilitated the purchase of vehicles by healthcare workers.

3. Strengthening Emergency capacity and capability nationwide including the strengthening of the National Ambulance Service and ensuring collaboration with NADMO.

4. Working with the private sector to establish a World Class Research & Laboratory System.

5. Implementing a National Epidemic Response System.

6. Amending Health Laws on administration, management and financing to create an environment conducive for decentralization

7. Strengthening the pharmaceutical industry and services to ensure:

a. Policies on procurement and prescription guarantee the availability of effective drugs whilst ensuring drugs are used appropriately.

b. To improve drug supply chain by expanding local production ensuring quality affordable drugs are available.

c. To establish a national bioequivalence laboratory.

8. Coordinating with all government agencies to ensure that improved sanitation and waste management are pillars of their operations.

9. Providing legislative, administrative and financial support for the implementation of the Mental Health Bill, control of non-Communicable and neglected tropical diseases, organ
transplantation and assisted reproduction.

10. Improving health facilities and providing Health Centres of Excellence.

11. Making Ghana the destination of choice for Health Tourism in the ECOWAS region.

12. Making accessible, affordable and of high quality the continuum of care a woman experiences through fertility period to delivery, including the health of children.

13. Promoting good nutrition and physical activity as a shared national value.

14. Prioritizing the training and skills development of health staff.

15. Developing an inter-sectorial action plan to reduce the incidence of teenage pregnancy and early marriage.

16. Improving health data quality to inform local, district and national planning.

Chapter 11
SECURITY

The APC believes that the simple blanket implementation of our existing laws by our security agencies, without selectivity, will go a long way to sanitize our society, assuage the fears of the citizenry and dramatically transform our society.

In this regard, the APC government will ensure that all our security personnel are properly-trained, properly-resourced, and provided with incentives to enable them professionally discharge their duties and obligations fairly and effectively without ANY interference from the executive branch of government.

THE POLICE SERVICE

The APC in government will resource our police to continue to maintain law and order and protect lives and property. Our policies are outlined below.

We will:

* Review and restructure recruitment into our Police Service to stamp out the fraud and cronyism that has bedeviled recent recruitments;

* Continue to recruit additional personnel into the Police Service, as we work towards the target of meeting the UN ration of 1:500 police to civilians;

* Ensure that our marine police unit is expanded and resourced;

* Provide the police with modern communication and policing equipment;

* Develop a comprehensive policy to enhance cyber security and tackle cyber-crime;

* Invigorate highway patrols to combat highway robberies and reduce motor accidents on our roads;

* Improve the current police visibility arrangements by setting up a Crime Prevention Department;

* Strengthen community policing;

* Build two new police hospitals at Sunyani and Bolgatanga to serve the increased number of Police Personnel;

* Build two major Police training schools to harmonise and standardize police training in the country;

* Improve and resource all police training institutions including the command college at Winneba;

* Improve the training of CID both locally and internationally.

THE ARMED FORCES

The APC in government will continue to provide the Armed Forces with adequate and modern resources to enable them perform their core function of defending the territorial integrity of Ghana. We will also enable them to meet their peacekeeping obligations, provide humanitarian services, including medical evacuation and to participate in national disaster relief, when they occur.

In addition, the APC government will:

a. Complete the third phase of the 37 Military Hospital project and upgrade the equipment there to meet modern medical challenges.

b. Build a new military hospital in Tamale to serve the northern zone.

c. Ensure that personnel who serve in UN Peacekeeping Missions are paid at the duty post.

d. Improve institutions under the military including the training schools, Military Academy and Training Schools (MATS), Armed Forces Recruits centre, Ghana Armed Forces Command and Staff College and Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Centre.

e. Protect Military lands from encroachment, and

f. Continue local and foreign training for the Armed Forces.

PRISONS AND FIRE SERVICE

The APC will work towards providing fire service stations in all districts in Ghana and work to decongest our prisons while introducing a system of separate dedicated prions for remand and convicted inmates to serve as proper correctional homes. Areas of reform will include:

a. Pre-trial detention

b. Prison Management

c. Alternative measures and sanctions

d. Social integration

e. Health facilities

NARCOTICS AND ILLICIT DRUG TRADE

We will introduce a robust and comprehensive anti-narcotic drug and anti-organized crime policy with severe sanctions and penalties to serve as deterrence for potential offenders. Our policy will seek to educate the youth about the hazards of narcotic drugs and organized crime.

Working with our international partners, we will institute measures to prevent hard drugs from being imported into Ghana and also get rid of Ghana's reputation as a trans-shipment pint.

We will strengthen our detection institutions and systems. 

SMALL ARMS

We will put measures to curb the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and enforce laws on its illegal possession, manufacturing and trade.

Chapter 12

YOUTH AND SPORTS
YOUTH AGENDA

The APC believes that the youth are the drivers of innovation and growth and our national youth policy objectives will set a new vision for leadership development and the development of sports. We will create an enabling environment to build the capacity of our youth to take on more active roles in our country's future and its development.

In pursuant to this, a Hassan Ayariga government will focus on the following:

* Set up a Youth Development Authority (YDA) to coordinate and harmonise all government ­ sponsored youth initiatives.

* Establish a Youth Enterprise Fund.

* Develop industrial parks in all regions targeting young Ghanaians who start small businesses to provide them with access to a clean workspaces, equipment, funding and basic amenities like electricity and water.

* Introduce a policy where at least 5% of all Government procurement is contracted from entities established under the Youth Enterprise Fund or entities established by persons under 35.

* Offer tax incentives to young entrepreneurs to encourage them to initiate start-up businesses.

* Introduce tax credits and other incentives for Companies that hire young people.

* Focus on ICT training to create job avenues locally and offshore for our youth.

* Institute a Buy-Local policy for Government agencies with regards to ICT to ensure that applications and software are procured from indigenous ICT firms.

SPORTS DEVELOPMENT

Many years of low investments in sports development has resulted in low morale and poor achievements. The absence of an adequate legal framework for sports development and promotion, also hinders the development of sports. The lack of maintenance culture has led to the deterioration of sports infrastructure, and the neglect of school sports and other sporting disciplines have resulted in the fallen standards.

An APC administration will also create an enabling environment that will provide the right incentive for Public Private Partnership (PPP) in Sports. Under the APC, sports development and promotion will be prioritized.

We will pursue the following:

1. Modernize sports through the provision of the right legal framework by passing into law the comprehensive Sports Bill initiated under
President Kufuor.

2. Ensure that District Assemblies fully participate in sports development and promotion.

3. The Ministry will collaborate with Local Assemblies to rehabilitate dilapidated football parks across the country to help develop lower league football.

4. Promote the construction of sports facilities within communities in partnership with the private sector.

5. Develop Youth Development and Sports Centres in all Regions. Each centre will house a fully equipped library, ICT hub, social hall, multi-purpose pitches and courts.

6. Pursue the vision of providing modern multi-sport stadia for the Regions without one ­ Brong Ahafo, Eastern, Upper East, Upper West and Volta;

7. Establish a special unit at the Ministry to develop and promote other sporting disciplines and inter schools sports;

8. Put in place an effective maintenance regime in partnership with the Private Sector.

9. Create a Sports Fund.

10. Encourage the private sector to provide funding for sports through the establishment of incentive packages.

11. Award scholarships to promising young athletes so they can development in the best of environments.

Chapter 13
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Building a Compassionate Society
We aim to create a society of fair opportunities for all Ghanaians. The APC government will create a compassionate society which ensures that all citizens share in Ghana's wealth and prosperity. This will be achieved by establishing a well-funded, functioning welfare system to address the needs of the weak, marginalized, vulnerable and socially excluded.

We will:

* Amend the Disability Act.

* Pass appropriate Legislative Instruments for the Mental Health Act.

* Staff and properly resource the National Council on Persons with Disability.

* Implement inclusive education and equal employment opportunity policies.

* Ensure the National Disability Council is decentralized to the regional level in order to coordinate the activities of the various federations.

* Establish a special scholarship package for people with disabilities from the basic to the tertiary level.

* Set up a special training school for persons with disability, with campuses in the northern and the southern sectors, to train them on
technical and skill training programmes.

* Encourage both public and private institutions to reserve a quota of jobs that can be filled by persons with disability.

Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP):

* Adopt effective means-testing to properly target, identify, and enroll beneficiary households. Establish a consistent and regular monthly disbursement plan.

* Target female-headed households where intervention may have the greatest positive impact.

The Ghana School Feeding Programme:

* Adequately fund, rationalize, and improve monitoring processes under the Ghana School Feeding Programme.

* Train caterers on the hygienic preparation of nutritious food.

* Provide adequate funding for monitoring.

* Ensure regular payments are made to caterers.

* Motivate caterers and link them directly to local farmers to promote use of local foodstuffs.

Mainstream aging, retirement, and pensions into national planning and service delivery

We will develop and implement policies for the aged and mainstream aging issues into national development frameworks and poverty education strategies. We aim to address, develop and improve the coverage ofa comprehensive social protection systems for senior citizens.

To this end, the APC will:

* Fully implement the provisions under the National Pensions Act (2008), Act 766.

* Use the appropriate information technology platform to decentralize and automate pension payments, and establish desks in each District Assembly for this purpose.

* Establish a pension scheme for farmers, ancillary workers and members of small scale business associations like drivers of the
GPRTU.

Social Security and Employee Benefits

APC shall put an elaborate social security system that sees to it that;

Ghanaian citizens live comfortably even if they're sick, disabled, unemployed or retired.

* People with jobs must, as a rule, make payments to four parts of the system, for health insurance, long-range nursing care, pensions and unemployment. These payments shall constitute about 40% of gross income, but the employer will pay half of the cost, meaning that the employee is paying only 20% of his income. Other pillars of the social security program are company accident insurance, paid for completely by the employer, and social indemnity, which the state handles.

* The premiums will depend on income. The greater it is the more you get paid, up to a certain limit. The premium is about 14.6% of gross income for the national health insurance, the exact amount depending on the insuring company. Premiums are paid on income per year. For long-range nursing care insurance the payment will be 2.35% ­ 2.60% on monthly income.The yearly income limits for pension and unemployment insurance charges are 18.7% for pension insurance and 3% for unemployment insurance.

Employed persons making more money have the option of either remaining in the statutory health insurance plan or taking out private insurance. The employer still will, with certain limitations, pay close to half the premiums of the private insurance plan. Self-employed persons can, under certain circumstances, also be insured under the statutory plan, or they may take out private insurance regardless of their income.

* Persons in both the statutory and private health plans are automatically enrolled in the long-range nursing insurance plan, covering health costs resulting from old age or disability.

* Pension insurance
This statutory old age insurance fund will ensure that employees can maintain an appropriate standard of living when they retire. Payments are generally made from age 65, and the maximum payout currently amounts to some 67% of average net income during the insured's working life. (The retirement age is to be gradually increased to 67 over the next 20 years.) It is not unusual for persons to receive retirement payments from two or more countries.

Unemployment insurance

This will be received by persons who have paid their premiums for at least one year during the previous five years. They must register with the Labor Office and be available to its placement service, agreeing to accept a job found for them if it is consistent with their training and experience. And they must check regularly with the Labor Office. If they do this they will receive a percentage of their most recent net income. The exact payment depends on the individual's circumstances.

* These payments will continue for six months to two years, depending on your age and length of employment. After that state assistance kicks in. The unemployed person gets a monthly sum plus allowances for housing and certain other things. But they only get this money if they need it. They may get less, or none at all, if they have independent means or if their spouse works.

Accident insurance

* The statutory accident insurance system will offer protection and assistance in the event of mishaps at work, or on the way to and from work. And it provides the same for your children at school or on the way to or from school. It also covers any job-incurred illnesses.

Payments will cover the costs of treatment and recuperation, pensions in the event of invalidity and funeral costs in the event of death. The employer pays the premiums on this one in their entirety.

Social indemnity

This will be for persons whose adverse condition is considered the responsibility of the community, and is paid by the state. Those covered include disabled war veterans, war widows and orphans, soldiers with service-incurred health problems and the victims of violent crime.

Unemployment benefits

* APC government will give unemployment benefit to Ghanaians who are not legally employed and food benefit to support their livelihood.

* To receive unemployment benefits, you must inform the labour office that you are unemployed and apply for the benefit.

* You are required to report voluntarily any change in your personal situation to the labour office, in case the change may impact your
entitlement to benefits (e.g. if you start to receive a pension or have found a job).

* Unemployed persons with children receive 67% of net wage without children, 60% of the net wage

Children Allowance

* APC government shall give child allowance to all Ghanaian children whose parents are unemployed in Ghana under our benefit policy.
Ghanaian children will be entitled to child allowance from birth to working age or when one is gainfully employed.

Maternity Allowance

* APC government will give maternity allowance to pregnant women. The policy is designed to assist would-be mothers to prepare towards their maternal journey, they will also receive free counseling through that policy

* Food benefit Based on our plan to undertake mechanized farming to guarantee food Security. Through our policy for mechanized farming and attitude towards marking our country a production base. We shall attain food security, and will give food benefit to our unemployed men and women of our nation. We shall coordinate it through our date base system to make sure distribution and collection is done properly.

Women Empowerment and Children's Rights

The APC remains committed to gender equality and children's rights and will work assiduously to ensure:

* The economic empowerment of women will be vigorously pursued through specific interventions related to predominantly female economic activity in each Region.

* A percentage of MASLOC funds are set aside for female applicants.

* We will reintroduce and enforce the administrative directive on the reservation of 30% of poverty alleviation/credit funds of MMDA's to service women's enterprises and establish strong linkages with the Rural Enterprise Project.

* The Kayayei phenomenon is curbed:

a. By improving the economy of their districts of origin to curb their migration to the south.

b. By providing alternate life skills training and seed capital

c. By building hostels to accommodate those already in the trade, with attached day care centres for their children.

d. By improving their access to health care.

* The Domestic Violence, Human Trafficking, Disability Acts and other relevant pieces of legislation implemented fully.

* The APC government will continue implementing the policies that increased enrolment and retention in schools like the school feeding
and capitation grant. Special emphasis will also be placed on proper diagnosis and treatment of children with learning disabilities like
dyslexia and other special needs. Their education will be mainstreamed as far as practicable with the full implementation of the
inclusive education policy.

* We will introduce a District Integrated Social Services programme for children, families and vulnerable adults to consolidate the health, education, justice (DOVVSU) and all social protection programmes.

* The APC will establish a Child Protection System to identify and tackle the underlying factors including the family and poverty related issues that create children in need, children at risk of harm and children suffering harm.

* We will strengthen and enforce regulations and introduce national minimum standards for residential children's homes.

* The APC government will reform the adoption and foster care regime and provide incentives for fostering 'at-risk' children.

* Women with disability

Women with disabilities constitute 42.46 percent of the total disabled population.They require protection against exploitation and abuse.
Special programmes will be developed for education, employment and provision of other rehabilitation services to women with
disabilities bearing in mind their special needs.
Programmes will be undertaken to rehabilitate abandoned disabled women/girls by encouraging their adoption into families, support to
house them and training for gainful employment skills.
Steps shall be taken to provide short duration stay homes for women with disabilities, hostels for working disabled women, and homes for aged disabled women.The APC Government will implement a programme to provide financial support to women with disabilities so that they may hire services to look after their children.

Chapter 14
INFRASTRUCTURE

The APC will embark on a sustainable and integrated infrastructural development programme across the country, including a modern road network, housing, water systems, aviation, ICT, and railways. We will ensure the best value for money and meaningful Ghanaian participation in ICT at all levels. We shall create jobs and prosperity through our Integrated Infrastructure Development Programme.

National Asset Protection Project

One of the major challenges in the efficient management of public finances, and in economic development is the inability or unwillingness of succeeding governments to complete projects started by their predecessor governments. Currently, billions of Ghana Cedis are locked up in numerous uncompleted projects scattered across the country.

Our government will establish a National Asset Protection Project to perform the following functions:

* Conduct a physical and financial audit to locate, identify and value each of these assets.

* Conduct a Social Impact, Economic Impact, & Financial Viability Assessment of each of these assets with the view of completing those that meet a set criteria.

* Establish an Asset Securitization Bank as a vehicle to raise funds for completion of these projects.

Aside such a policy leading to the protection of national assets and safeguarding national wealth, it will lead to three major benefits:

* Job Creation: An army of student architects and draughtsmen, as well as property valuers and related professionals will be deployed in
all districts to conduct the audit.

* Value Creation: The Government will be able to tap into a vast pool of funds for completion of these projects and further development.

* Continuity of Projects: It will ensure that there is a continuity in development as funds available to continue projects started by
predecessor governments without a break. We intend to continue and complete projects started by the NDC administration and bring closure to the disgraceful spectacle of abandoned projects around our country.

Roads and Railways

Transportation infrastructure is one of the weakest sectors in our development and until we solve the deficit in the roads and railways, we
shall remain underdeveloped. One of our major financing strategies for infrastructure development will be to embark on Public-Private-Partnerships, where appropriate.

The APC policy on road and transport seeks to achieve the following:

* Reduce cost of building roads: - Streamline the awarding of contracts and strengthen the procurement process to maximize value for money.

* Increase the quality of life of our citizens by reducing traffic and congestion, reducing the negative effect of dust pollution on their
health, reducing travel time to the hospital, and reducing road traffic accidents.

The APC will achieve these objectives by:

* Road and Transportation Cost Reduction Strategies

We will strictly adhere to the provisions of the procurement law in order to reduce high project costs. We will pass legislation to the effect that at least 20% of the implementation of road contracts awarded to foreign contractors should be sub-contracted to local contractors.

Integrate data of the DVLA, police and insurance companies in order to reduce time and cost of acquiring necessary documents and permits needed to register vehicles.

Continue the expansion of the ports and fully automate the process for clearing goods and vehicles.

* Enhanced movement of goods and citizens

Develop an integrated Light Rail Transit System for our major cities to connect main business districts with outlying residential locations.
Speedily complete the construction of the Western and Eastern corridor road networks.

Tar gravel roads in areas of high agricultural production and tourism.

Tar roads in District capitals and extend them to major towns within the district.

Construct the Eastern line railway from Accra to Paga through Kumasi to facilitate haulage of goods from the Eastern Region and the exploitation of iron ore and other mineral reserves in the North. This will also facilitate the operation of the Boankra Inland Port which has been rendered inoperable as a result of the absence of the Eastern Rail Line.

We shall build tram rail system to transport our people from one locality to another, A tram is a rail vehicle which runs on tracks along public urban streets, and also sometimes on a segregated right of way. We shall construct tramways in every city in Ghana. The Trams will be powered by electricity. The Trams shall run between cities and towns (inter-urbans, tram-train), and/or partially grade-separated even in the cities (light rail). Tram vehicles are usually lighter and shorter than conventional trains and rapid transit trains, are often indistinct. We shall establish two different type of trams, the underground and the street trams. We will operate on dual power systems -- electricity in city streets, and diesel in more rural environments.

[Picture: Modern tram in action (Greece)]

Develop the Volta into a major transportation artery by building ferry ports at such locations as Buipe, Yapei, Yei, Makango, Kwadwokurom, Kete-Krachi, Adowso, Ekyeamanfrom, Akateng, and Boso.

* Maintenance Scheme

Clear the huge backlog of road maintenance works resulting from low performance and neglect by the NDC­led government.

Ensure thereafter a timely maintenance of roads.

The APC will establish a timely and effective preventive maintenance plan for all Metro buses.

Strengthen the current axle load control on our road corridors to reduce the deterioration rate of our roads.

* Increased Quality of Life

Tar roads leading to district and reginal hospitals in order to speed up access to health facilities in case of emergency. Establish trauma centres within hospitals along the main highways in order to facilitate medical treatment of citizens in case of an accident.

Promote research into available road construction materials to strengthen existing gravel pavements and dampen dust pollution.

Reduce fatalities and injuries on our roads by:

* Scaling up efforts in road safety programmes.

* Embarking on nationwide road sign and road marking placement.

* Reviewing location and lay-bys of fuel stations in order to reduce accidents on our highways.

Reduce traffic congestions by:

* Widening major arterial roads to dual carriage.

* Constructing lay-bys and dedicated traffic lanes for commercial vehicles

* Constructing by-passes and interchanges at major intersections like The Tema Motorway Roundabout, the Suame and Oforikrom Roundabouts in Kumasi, and the Takoradi PTC Roundabout.

Aviation

The APC seeks to make Ghana's airports the aviation hub for all international, regional, domestic airlines within West Africa.
The domestic aviation industry is under severe stress. Air fares have gone up significantly following the introduction of 17.5% VAT in 2015, coupled with a new policy to force domestic airlines to purchase handling services at the Kotoka International Airport from either Menzes or Aviance. The high cost of aviation fuel (the highest in the sub-region) and the depreciation of the Cedi have also contributed to the decline in the sector.

Consequently, passenger numbers dropped from 718,725 in 2014 to 525,440 in 2015, a 36.8% fall. Since 2011, three out of five domestic airlines have since ceased operations ­ Citylink, Fly540 and Antrak. Even the domestic airlines in operation now are doing so under severe constraints.

To address these challenges, the APC will:

* Reduce the price of aviation fuel to match prices in the sub-region.

* Review the current baggage handling arrangements for domestic airlines

* Review the 17.5% VAT that was imposed on domestic air transportation.

* Encourage and support Ghanaian airlines and entrepreneurs to set up strong private airlines that can fully utilize all the route rights for
the benefit of the economy.

Water Infrastructure

WATER FOR ALL

We will seek to integrate the management of water resources into the economic development activity in order to raise revenue and properly
control its usage.

Under the APC's Water for all agenda, our goal is to ensure that every Ghanaian has access to potable water.

The APC will achieve this by:

* Sinking at least 25,000 new boreholes and an additional 300 small town water supply systems in the rural areas and small towns.

* Undertaking major water systems (treatment plants and associated distribution systems)

* Ensuring that the water sector gets the investment that it needs to upgrade antiquated urban and rural water systems.

* Commissioning water projects to ensure constant supply of water to all district, regional, and teaching hospitals as well as educational institutions.

* Constructing storm drains to deal with the perennial flooding in Accra.

* Regulating small scale mining to protect our water bodies.

* Managing refuse collection and disposal in such a way to reduce pollution of our water bodies.

Information Communication and Technology

The APC will put ICT and data revolution at the centre of our national developmental agenda in order to make Ghana a regional ICT Hub.

We shall achieve this by engaging in the following initiatives:

* National Identification scheme: We shall endeavour to register every resident of Ghana within the first two years of taking office.

* Mainstream ICT in public sector:

- Establish an integrated Data Warehouse of databases from key public institutions using the National Identification Card as the unique identifier for users.

- Automate the processes involved in accessing public services at both national and local government offices.

* Improving telecommunications accessibility:
We will facilitate nationwide access to mobile networks.

* Create opportunities for entrepreneurship
We shall develop ICT Incubator Hubs in various regional capitals to create business opportunities in the private sector.

* Increase citizens' accessibility to the data platform by reducing tariffs on the use of data for internet access.

* Work with the private sector to increase the broadband bandwidth and speed of connections nationwide.

HOUSING

Quality, Affordable Housing for All

Our vision is to use an appropriate mix of public policy and public-private investments to deliver quality, affordable social housing and private housing solutions that meets the needs and financial capacity of the average Ghanaian. We recognize the dream of every Ghanaian to own a home. We also recognise that for majority of Ghanaians, ownership may not be the route towards a decent accommodation, unlike renting. Our thinking and approach to solving these twin aspirations is to adopt a novel way to the construction of homes, and instituting creative financing schemes.

There are three main constraints to housing Ghanaians:

* A deficit which has created a backlog

* Undersupply of annual requirements of housing units
* High cost of buying and/or renting a home

The solution to these constraints would be to undertake high quality social, low and mid-income housing delivery within the short, medium and long term.

To develop the housing sector, the government of the APC will:

* improve overall affordability and access to decent homes for all working Ghanaians and their families in modern communities.

* Develop housing units targeted at the vulnerable and the marginalized in society.

* Develop financing schemes to assist home buyers to acquires.

* Improve the quality of infrastructure in existing communities.
 
* Use public policy to develop the entire housing value-chain.

We will:

* Establish land banks with infrastructure such as roads, drainage, water and power in place for the development of affordable housing units on a public-private partnership (PPP) basis.

* Offer tax incentives to local real estate developers.

* Work with the Trades Union Congress (TUC), Ghana National Association of Teachers (GNAT), National Association of Graduate Teachers (NAGRAT), and Farmers' Groups to facilitate the construction of homes for their members through the provision of the appropriate financing guarantees.

* Create a Home Ownership Mortgage Enterprise (HOME) that will leverage the provisions under the National Pensions Act, Act 766 to underwrite, and where possible, affordable mortgage facilities for home buyers. This will also be used to push the acceleration of the Tier 3 component of the new pensions regime to get more informal workers to invest in their pensions into acquiring a home.

* We will implement a national policy requiring every public building including new homes built under all PPP arrangements to install solar
panels and water-harvesting technologies.

Chapter 15

NATURAL RESOURCES ­ LAND, FORESTRY AND MINING

Introduction

Ghana's natural resources, upon which so much of the country's economic activity and the population's livelihood depend are being depleted at an alarming rate. More than 50% of the original forest area has been converted to agricultural land by clearing for perennial or annual cropping.

The APC policy on forestry resources will seek to rehabilitate degraded forest reserve areas trough planting of fast-growing indigenous and exotic species, conservation and sustainable use of natural resources.

Restoration of degraded areas and plantation establishment

The APC will target annually 30,000 hectare (ha) of degraded areas within and outside forest reserves for restoration and plantation development using fast growing indigenous and exotic species. We will develop and support small scale community tree nurseries

* Community nurseries for trees will be established in a minimum of 800 communities ­ averagely 4 communities per district.

Bamboo and Rattan plantations development

Currently, rattan is extensively used in the furniture and handicraft industry while bamboo is mainly used for construction. It is projected that 50,000 hectares of these plantations would be required to augment the supplies from natural stands over the next 25 years. The APC will support the annual establishment of 1,000 hectares of bamboo and rattan plantation and will encourage individuals and private sector involvement through the provision of subsidized planting material.

Support conservation of biodiversity and priority ecosystems

* Continue the opening of forestry boundaries,

* Re-survey and demarcate forests with permanent concrete pillars,

* Support the protection of the remaining network of natural forest and biodiversity hotspots in the country to serve as gene banks for
indigenous species and refuge areas for threatened, endemic and rare species.

Launch an Apiculture Forest Conservation Programme

Two million bee-hives will be made available to forest fringe communities, in the next four years, as a forest protection mechanism and job creation incentive.

Ecotourism

The APC will support the enhancement of the ecotourism industry in Ghana to further boost its potential and contribution to economic
development.

Promote sustainable water resource management

Water is a dwindling resource and the threat of water scarcity looms large. Trends indicate that Ghana would be a 'water stressed' state by 2025, and the gap between the demand and supply would be 50%.

We will address this threat in a comprehensive manner:

Protection of water catchment areas

We will launch the Clean Rivers Programme across the country with the participation of voluntary organisations. The goal of this programme is to maintain and improve the quality of water resources, within each river basin through an ongoing partnership with water stakeholders, local government, businesses and citizens.

The APC will promote:

* Replanting of trees along the banks of all major water bodies and their tributaries to reduce silting and other negative human activities near river banks.

* Dry season gardening within the buffer zone to protect river banks. Construct canals and/or use water pumping equipment to transport water to the farms to ensure efficient water use.

* Procure and supply farmers with high quality seeds.

* Promote improved crop rotation and integrated nutrient and pest management.

* Regular assessments of effluents into our river bodies with the view to controlling pollution

MINERAL RESOURCES

A government led by Hassan Ayariga will be environmentally conscious in granting mining leases in order to ensure protection of our environment and its biodiversity.

* To ensure that mineral revenues are efficiently managed for the benefit of Ghanaians, the APC will pass a consolidated Mineral Revenue Management Law similar to the Petroleum Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815) to guide the use of mineral revenues in strategic sectors of our economy.

* We will mainstream critical strategic mineral feedstock into the domestic economy including low value minerals to support economic
value addition.

* We will support local mining capability by introducing institutional arrangements that promote coherence between mining policies and
Science Technology and Innovation (STI) programmes.

* We will encourage the development of shared infrastructure to integrate mining with community development.

* We will promote mining value-addition through the processing of minerals.

* We will restructure the artisanal mining subsector with a view to regularizing 'galamsey'.

* We will ensure a positive socio-economic impact of mining on local communities through appropriate interventions for community development.

* We will increase transparency in the allocation of mineral rights and the utilization of mineral revenues at national and community levels.

* We will ensure that mining and logging activities are undertaken in an environmentally sustainable manner.

* We will ensure that land restoration is undertaken after mining operations come to an end.

* We will fully decentralize the Minerals Commission by establishing additional district offices of the Commission.

Chapter 16

SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION AND ENVIRONMENT

For Ghana to make strides in its development, science, technology and innovation must be essential elements in all aspects of the national
development process. The APC is committed to promoting and leveraging the efforts of the
scientific community to help transform the economy into a production based one.

To realize this, the APC will undertake the initiatives listed under each of the broad sectors of science and technology:

Governance

* We shall create the portfolio of Chief Scientific Advisor to the President to advise the President on policies regarding science
technology and innovation.

Stimulate Demand of Science and Technology

* Establish a merit-based research system to encourage scientific research for critical sectors of the economy.

* Strengthen collaboration between industry, universities, and research centres to promote the commercialization of scientific research
outputs;

* Stimulate the demand of science and technology from the private sector.

* Expand the Research and Development capabilities of the country through the establishment of regional Technology Parks.

* Establish a flagship system of Ghana Centres of Excellence (GCEs) across the country that networks all High Education Institutes, including all other research organizations such as CSIR and CRIG.

The GCEs will cover themes such as:

* Biomedical engineering
 
* Pharmaceutical technology and Bioequivalence Research

* Crop improvements and seed technology

* Environment and sanitation engineering

* Energy engineering

* Manufacturing equipment engineering

* Agricultural technology,

* Food process engineering,

* Building technology,

* Electronics and Electronic Assembly.

Furthermore we would mandate all GCEs to create multidisciplinary graduate schools to drive youth training and to conduct their core activities while maintaining permanent staff strength that is lean and effective. At least 3 GCEs would be established by the end of 2020.

Education

* Support the national policy of achieving 60:40 student ratio for the Sciences as compared to the Humanities by expanding STEM scholarship schemes.

* We shall also provide incentives and support for accredited private tertiary institutions to establish schools and faculties of science and
technology.

Energy

* Explore the use of various renewable energy alternatives, e.g. Solar, Wind, Tidal Waves and Biomass including Biogas, Wood Gasification
and Biodiesel.

Waste Management

* Use Science & Technology to identify the most economic and efficient ways to recycle urban waste.

* Build power plants that will use combustible domestic and industrial waste to generate electricity.

Agriculture and Land-use

* Use Science and Technology to map out the soil structure and composition of the country. With this data, the country can increase agricultural production by using the right mix of seeds and fertilizer at the right location.

* Work with the scientific community to identify optimal use of agrochemicals in order to reverse/reduce their effects on land, water bodies, food, and health of our citizens.

* Continue research and development to enhance land-use systems, including water management techniques, sustainable forestry techniques and improved sanitation systems.

Water

* We will facilitate research and development in technologies for water desalination.

Environment

* The APC will update and strengthen the many policies and programmes set up to manage the environment, especially the National Environmental Protection Program (NEPP) and the Environmental Action Plan (EAP).

* The APC will work with its international partners to access, in a more effective manner, the $30 billion global fund available for climate
change purposes.

Chapter 17

TOURISM, CULTURE AND CREATIVE ARTS

The next APC government will focus on transforming Ghana's tourism sector through investment, innovation, the pursuit of service excellence and meaningful partnerships to enable it become a major revenue generating sector that provides a safe, memorable and enjoyable experience for tourists.

We will aggressively develop our tourist sites to bring them to world-class standards complete with the requisite amenities and facilities. To make communities take ownership and be interested in the sustainability of tourist attractions in their localities, we will champion a revenue-sharing program to inject 5% of tourism revenues from fees of well-developed tourist attractions into local community projects.

To project the image of Ghana as a globally-recognized tourism brand and market it as a preferred, exotic and safe destination of choice, we will transform the Ghana Tourism Authority into a modern, efficient research and marketing institution with the necessary technical resources and funds. We will provide the needed incentives to private sector investors to invest in new tourism facilities and upgrade existing ones. Priority will be given to high-impact facilities that have the potential to draw more patrons and increase traffic to tourist venues. These include beach resorts, quality hotels, safaris, heritage villages and fun parks.

We will make domestic tourism an aggressive plank of our tourism strategy with a marketing drive centred on entrenching a tourism culture among Ghanaians.

We will reactivate and resource the Ghana Museums and Monuments Board to function as a repository of both our cultural and historical records. We will pursue an ecotourism policy that enables us properly conserve natural tourist attractions whilst protecting the ecosystem. Government will invest in Tourism IT infrastructure such as Tourism Apps as an enabler to improve knowledge and the sharing of information about tourism opportunities in Ghana.

CULTURE

The APC government will give the Arts and Culture Industry the proper attention and incentives to flourish and to also create jobs and wealth for our people. We will give our culture pride of place in our national development.

The APC will build a detailed inventory of all our cultural assets for the nation to have a database of these assets. This inventory will include all of Ghana's tangible assets like the Larabanga mosque and intangible cultural assets like rites of passage and values and belief systems which are in danger of disappearing completely with aging traditional custodians.

The Copyright Act, Act 690, 2005, among other provisions, provides for the protection of Adinkra symbols and the older Kente designs as expression of folklore. The APC will ensure that the provisions regarding the protection of Kente and Adinkra designs are strictly enforced against illicit exploitation by foreign interests to enable Ghana maximize revenue through the proper marketing of these heirlooms.

CREATIVE ARTS

With the Creative Arts Sector being perennially under resourced, it has not blossomed enough to ensure Ghana's creative arts professionals are able to make a comfortable living off their work. The sector has the potential to greatly contribute to GDP growth. As such, the APC will focus on supporting the sector to enable it realize its full potential for generating wealth for its practitioners, create jobs and grow the
economy.

To make available funds to modernize and develop the sector, The APC will establish a Creative Arts Fund.

Nothing demoralizes a creative arts professional more than when intellectual property is stolen and misused with no consequence for the copyright thief. The APC will set up a Creative Arts Court to deal with all matters relating to the arts, complete with a dedicated enforcement unit.
To provide an effective interface with government and other key stakeholders, the APC will establish a Creative Arts Council to coordinate and harmonize the various interests and fragmented associations into a well-functioning body to protect the interests of members. We will educate the public on copyright laws and provide the necessary framework for payment of appropriate royalties for literary works. We will collaborate with the private sector interests to acquire the technology and equipment needed to log creative art works in order to determine true and deserved royalties.

In order to stimulate an interest in the arts in young people, we will promote regional and district literature, music, dance and drama competitions, particularly in schools and colleges. We will pursue the construction of modern large seating theatres in Takoradi, Tamale and Kumasi. We will also set up an additional Copyright Office in Tamale to cater for the Northern Sector in addition to the existing ones in Accra and Kumasi.

Chapter 18

CHIEFTAINCY,RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AND CIVIL SOCIETY

The APC will give due deference to Chiefs as the embodiment of the history and traditions of our people and will support the Chieftaincy institution to preserve, sustain and employ the traditional and cultural values, as well as practices that accelerate wealth creation and social harmony for total development.
Recognising the indispensable role of chiefs in local government and their existence as symbols of traditional solidarity, the APC will support our chiefs to provide the leadership and focus for local and district development. In this regard, unlike the NDC, we will ensure the regular and prompt release of Consolidated Funds disbursements due to chiefs to enable them carry out their functions.

The APC will ensure the prompt payment of royalties due Chiefs, Queen Mothers and Traditional Councils. We will provide government support to the institution of Chieftaincy in the performance of its duties, its evolution and further modernization. The APC will support the National House of Chiefs to codify and
systematize traditional laws and culture.

We will involve Chiefs, Queen mothers and Traditional Authorities in the afforestation and greening of Ghana. We will foster a collaboration of Government agencies and traditional leaders that will centre on the protection of water bodies and conservation of the environment. We will forge a new and formal collaboration between Chiefs, Queen mothers and Traditional Authorities with NADMO so that relief assistance can be better managed in our local communities during natural disasters and other emergencies.

RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

The APC will continue to actively engage religious organizations as the leading moral-cultural institutions that have a key role in moulding the character and conduct of our citizens. We acknowledge the important role of the mission hospitals in our health care delivery system, especially the rural areas. We will therefore work with bodies such as the Christian Health Association of Ghana (CHAG) and all other stakeholders to ensure prompt payments from the NHIS fund and pay existing debts promptly.

CIVIL SOCIETY AND CHARITY ORGANISATIONS

Civil Society in Ghana plays a significant role in governance and development. Right from before independence, voluntary groups, associations and organisations have been involved in all sectors of
Ghanaian life.

The APC government will launch a new era of cooperation and collaboration with civil society to improve governance and enhance the well-being of Ghanaians. We will work to ensure that the sector develops and thrives. The APC government will review the registration requirement of civil society organisations to reflect current trends and modern realities. Through legislation, we will provide tax incentives to corporate organisations that support and partner civil society organisations to bring social and economic improvement in the lives of Ghanaians. Our government will create the enabling legislative and economic environment for philanthropy to blossom and promote a new era of giving, knowing that a prosperous Ghana makes it easier for individuals and organisations to support civil society. We will also enact a Charities Organisations law to streamline the
operations of charities in Ghana.

The APC government will focus on interventions that will unleash the potential of all, including the vulnerable, weak and excluded, particularly women, children People Living With Disability (PLWD), protect their rights
and eradicate or reform harmful, inhumane and inimical cultural and traditional practices.

CONCLUSION

We have seen many leaders emerge, showing a profound understanding of the hopes and dreams of Ghanaians, their fears and anxieties, their needs and wants. However, when they are entrusted with political authority, they become intoxicated with power and begin to behave otherwise. Soon they start making serious political blunders that bring nothing but shame and suffering to those who elected them. This evasive cycle has brought untold hardship and led to under-development of this Country.

There is a mounting sense of frustration and loss of hope each additional day that the people of our beloved country have to wait for change to come. Ghana with a diverse and rich mineral resource base still remains as one of the poorest countries in the world. It is demoralizing to note that Ghana, once the beacon of hope in Africa still remains somewhat dependent on international financial and technical assistance as well as the activities of the extensive Ghanaians in Diaspora. The domestic economy of Ghana continues to revolve around small scale agriculture, which accounts for 35 percent of GDP and employs about 60 percent of the workforce. Moreover, over half of the population has no access to clean drinking water, uninterrupted electricity, basic health services, and quality education.

Yet any pragmatic discussion of the country's economic situation degenerates into bickering partisanship, name calling, insults, heated tribalistic arguments that fail to identify the problems let alone address them. All these pointers leave one to doubt whether our past and present regimes have the capacity to produce and execute a national development plan that would lead Ghana on the road to economic advancement and progressive social change. Past and present regimes have made numerous lofty claims about
economic growth, but the growth has been 'snail paced' and public expenditure for social development has decreased.

Despite the promises, employment generation in the formal sector has been completely stagnant. Since major quantitative restrictions have been lifted as at 1992, Ghanaian market has been flooded with cheap foreign goods, which are affecting indigenous small-scale manufacturing sector adversely.

After years of liberalization, we need to raise critical questions about the increasing gap between the goal of macroeconomic development and social development. Why is the growing economy of Ghana so slow in reaching out to impoverished millions in remote villages, suburban and congested urban slums?

It is for these reasons that the All People's Congress (APC) respectfully seeks Ghanaians' mandate to positively transform Ghana beginning from 7th January 2017-7th January 2021.

The All People's Congress (APC) under Dr. Hassan Ayariga's Presidency is the only Party that can positively transform the socio-economic conditions of Ghana and bring total prosperity to all Ghanaians through an All-inclusive governance approach when elected into power in 7th December 2016 general election.

I respectfully urge you to support the APC by voting for Dr. Ayariga's Presidency and our Parliamentary Candidates on the 7th December, 2016.

Ladies and gentlemen, the NPP and NDC know the problems of our country, but the APC knows the solutions.

Our Agenda for 2016, promises nothing but jobs, prosperity and securing the future. This is our solemn pledge to the people of Ghana.

GhanaPoliticsOnline.Com
