IVOR KOBINA GREENSTREET (Presidential candidate of the Convention People's Party (CPP))

NANA GABBYS NKETIAH
(Vice Presidential candidate of the Convention People's Party (CPP))



Title: The CPP Manifesto

Author: Edmund Nminyem Delle 


FOREWORD 								 V

I. INTRODUCTION 							VI

II. OUR VISION FOR GHANA 					       VII

III. NKRUMAISM IS THE ANSWER					       VII
CONTENTS

A. SOCIAL POLICIES 							IX


CHAPTER								      PAGE
I. 	Education Policy 						 9

II.	Tertiary Institutions 						10

III	Science and Technology Policy 					11

IV	Health Policy 							12

V	Human Resource 						 	13

VI	Labour Quality Improvement 					14

VII	Benchmarking Productivity and Productivity Revolution: 		14

VIII	Housing Policy 							14

IX	Cultural Policy 						15

X	Sports Policy							15

XI	Media and Society 						16

XII	Combating Violent Crime 					16

XIII	Confronting the Narcotics Menace 				17

XIV	Empowering Women		 				17

XV	Protecting our Children 					18

XVI	Caring for the Aged 						19

XVII	Persons with Disability 					19

XVIII	Developing our Youth						20

XIX	Bridging the North-South Divide 				20


B. ECONOMIC POLICIES 							21

XX	National Development Planning 					23

XXI	Macroeconomic Policies 						23

XXII	Monetary Policy

XXIII	Fiscal Policy

XXIV	Exchange Rate Policy

XXV	Agricultural and Rural Transformation Policies 			25

XXVI	Food, Fisheries and Livestock Sub-Sectors 			25

XXVII	Cocoa Sub-Sector 						26

XXVIII	Forestry and Tree Crops Sub-Sectors: 				26

XXIX	Agro-processing 						27

XXX	Rural Transformation 						27

XXXI	Industrial Policies 						27



          


XXXII	Private Sector Development and Partnership: 			28

XXXIII	Mining and Quarrying Policy 					29

XXXIV	Manufacturing Policy 						29

XXXV	Energy Policy 							30

XXXVI	Construction Policy 						31

XXXVII	Service Sector Policies 					32

XXXVIII	Environment and Natural Resources 				33

XXXIX	Natural Environment 						33

XL	The Built Environment 						33

XLI	Natural Resources 						33

XLII	Financing Development 						33



C. RESPONSIVE GOVERNANCE 						35

XLIII	Beyond Good Governance 						35

XLIV	Fighting Corruption 						35

XLV	Devolution of Power and Increasing Social Accountability 	36

XLVI	The Constitution Review Process 				36

XLVII	Legislative Agenda 						37

XLVIII	Referenda 							37

XLIX	Role of Traditional Leaders 					37

L	Public Sector Reforms and Innovation 				38

LI	National Security 						38

LII	Judicial Reforms 						39



D. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 						41

LIII	Ghana and Globalisation 					41

LIV	Ghanaian Diaspora and Political Participation 			41

LV	International Professionals Forum of Ghana 			41

LVI	Relations with African Countries 				42

LVII	Relations with non-Ghanaian Diaspora 				42

LVIII	Relations with Donors 						42

LIX	Relations with Rest of the World 				42



E. JOIN US 								43

F. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 							43




The sense of purpose and urgency which the CPP brought to national development has 
essentially been missing since 1966. It is time we restore it. Our people can wait no longer. 

This manifesto answers our people's cry for a new covenant ( Apamfoforo )in Ghana. We believe 
that the State has a binding commitment to use its power to promote high rates of economic 
growth and development as well as to ensure that the wealth thereof is shared equitably among
Ghanaians ­ North and South, East and West. 

We aspire to work together with all Ghanaians to create a prosperous, just, safe, caring and 
united society where there is adequate food and shelter for all and there are ample 
opportunities for every Ghanaian to develop his or her personal and social potential to its fullest. 
We shall instil in our people a culture of discipline and excellence, respect for law and order, 
compassion towards one another, and the idea that we are one people with a common destiny. 

We believe that unless political power is placed in the hands of the CPP the search for real and 
lasting solutions to our political and social economic problems will remain elusive. God Bless 
Our Homeland Ghana. Forward Ever Backward Never!


				THE CPP MANIFESTO
					By
				EDMUND NMINYEM DELLE
 
National Chairman and Leader of the Convention People's Party. (CPP)


INTRODUCTION



This policy document reflects the views and intentions of the Conven on People's Party (CPP) 
on various development issues of domestic and international importance. They cover four 
broad areas of development, namely:

A. Social Policies

B. Economic Policies

C. Responsive Governance

D. International Relations


Within these policy areas the Party has identified four short-term priority areas that it 
will address immediately after it is re-elected into office. 
These areas are:

1. 	Job creation, with the launching of the Ghana Emergency Employment Programme 
	(GEEP) aimed primarily at the youth.

2. 	Essential social services such as providing affordable housing, water, electricity, 
	food, transport and sanitation.

3. 	Public safety, in other words combatting the armed robbery menace, the rise in 
	sexual violence against women and children, and the fatalities on our roads.

4. 	Managing our natural resources, The CPP intends to review and/or repeal/ 
	renegotiate all contracts which are not in the best interest of the country. By this we 
	intend to maximise our long term earnings to the benefit of our people.


Our overall development policies are informed by the Party's ideology of Nkrumaism, 
	whose

three main principles are:


1. 	Self-determination: We must re-assert control over our natural resources and 
	exercise national interest for the sustainable and equitable development of our 
	country.


2. 	Social Justice: The State has a moral and constitutional duty to promote equal 
	opportunity and equitable rewards for all Ghanaians, irrespective of age, gender, 
	ethnic, religious, political or other background.


3. 	Pan-Africanism: We must work with Africans at home and abroad to find the 
	common solutions to our common problems of racism, poverty, exploitation and 
	under development.



The implementation of the policies proposed herein will be based on a series of medium-
term plans to be developed by a CPP government. These plans will reflect both the party's 
ideology and the Directive Principles of State Policy, which constitute a national vision 
agreed by all Ghanaians in the 1992 constitution.

6


OUR VISION FOR GHANA
The first national asset of any country is its people, and they make their own history in the 
process of labouring to control and appropriate nature. 

The CPP shall therefore relate to the Ghanaian people drawn from across the length and breadth 
of our national territory as productive beings and not as ethnic or racial entities. 

The people shall constitute the resilient and ultimate base of all policies of the party. 
The CPP's vision is to build a just and prosperous society on the basis of a strong and diversified 
economy in a democratic environment. 

Our party is a profoundly democratic one, rooted in the belief that individuals can only reach 
their full potential in a society that embodies the values of liberty, equality, and solidarity. 

Only through creating material and cultural bonds of solidarity across racial, gender, age and 
class lines can true equality of opportunity be achieved. 

The CPP's vision for Ghana in one generation is to become a high middle-income country in a 
society that is just, safe, caring, united and prosperous, where there is adequate food, shelter, 
and opportunities for every Ghanaian, and where democratic and economic governance is 
devolved to the local level. We believe our nation should be built on a set of values that will 
ensure the birth of a new citizen who places the interest of the nation above self and the creation 
of a community that is 'fair for all'.


NKRUMAISM IS THE ANSWER



Who are we? 
The CPP is an Nkrumaist party and our philosophy is Nkrumaism. As Nkrumaists we are ever 
concerned with multiplying and strengthening our contact with the masses of the people and 
winning their confidence as their defenders against the evils of poverty, disease, hunger, 
ignorance and squalor. As Nkrumaists we strive to build a society that is just and fair for all.


CHAPTER I

Education Policy

For the CPP, education serves a multiple 
purpose of aiding the individual to better 
understand society and nature, and to 
acquire the skills needed to earn a decent 
living and contribute to national 
development. We intend to improve access 
to and quality of education and training for 
all Ghanaians.



Under our Accelerated Education Sector 
Investment Programme (AESIP) 
educational facilities from kindergarten to 
the tertiary level will be refurbished and 
expanded to meet the needs of a growing 
population and modernising society.


The CPP will do the following:



1. Significantly reduce income taxes for 
teachers (and health personnel) and 
give other incentives to those who 
work in rural areas and places 
designated as "deprived".



2. Continue to ensure that teachers are 
paid well and that those who need 
training receive them through every 
available and affordable means, 
including distance learning.



3. Use tax incentives for the private sector, 
especially financial institutions, to build 
school infrastructure in particular areas 
of the country and lease that 
infrastructure to the state for a 
specified period, after which they 
become state property.



4. Improve working conditions of 
teachers, including timely payment of 
salaries for new and current teachers 
and offering a attractive home-ownership 
packages.


5. Improve education content and 
administration as well as learning 
processes by strengthening 
decentralisation to give local 
administrators the authority to deal 
with local problems promptly without 
waiting for directives from the regional 
capitals or Accra.



6. Accelerate on-going programmes to 
increase the number of teachers in our 
classrooms while training others 
already in the classrooms with 
minimum disruption for teachers and 
students.



7. Build an educational system that does 
not only provide academic and life skills 
but inculcates in our children a high 
degree of self-esteem, personal 
responsibility, civic duty, patriotism 
and community service (volunteerism).



8. Strengthen academic and career 
counselling at all levels of the 
educational system.



To meet the expanded educa on needs of a 
growing population, the CPP will do the 
following in collaboration with the non-state 
sector, including religious organisations:



1. We will invest heavily in infrastructure 
and most importantly, the provision of 
equipment for teaching of science and 
technology and in improving the quality 
of teaching.



2. We will raise the school leaving age to 
18 years, make secondary school part 
of basic educa on and free, in order 
to improve access and quality at all 
levels throughout the country. 
Furthermore, we will actively promote 
boarding schools as a way of 
encouraging Ghanaians from all walks 
of life to live together and know each 
other before they enter the world of 
work, as this is one of the surest ways 
of fighting ethnocentrism and creating 
a common sense of nationhood among 
our future leaders.



3. Make vocational and technical 
education mostly
post-secondary to 
ensure that those attending 
vocational 
and technical schools are properly

prepared academically. Resources will 
be increased
to all vocational and 
technical schools under the AESIP.



4. We will establish new Industrial 
Training Boards in every region tasked 
to increase the range of training 
opportunities for school leavers. 
They will not just be concerned with the 
traditional craft skills, but also deal with 
the office, the shop, the farm and the factory.


CHAPTER II



Tertiary Institutions:


The CPP will expand and improve the 
quality of facilities at all tertiary institutions 
under AESIP to world class levels in order to 
gain a greater share of the international 
education market.



We will introduce an international distance 
learning scheme that will allow Ghanaian 
lecturers abroad to teach some classes in 
Ghana by the internet or satellite.



1. 	Public tertiary institutions: Set up 
	regional campuses for all state 
	universities and other tertiary 
	institutions to improve access and
	
	

reduce the cost of higher education to 
	households.


2. 	Decentralize teaching and other 
	specialized training for all universities 
	with an established capacity to offer 
	such training. This too will improve 
	access and reduce the pressure on 
	facilities and staff of the specialized 
	institutions.

3. 	Introduce professional managers with 
	experience of managing large private or 
	public organizations to head state 
	universities. This will free academics to 
	concentrate on teaching and research 
	and improve the quality of leadership 
	at these institutions.


4. 	Give students the opportunity to assess 
	and rate their lecturers regularly in 
	order to improve the quality of tertiary 
	education.


5. 	Enhance governance through quarterly 
	publication of financial and 
	management reports of tertiary 
	institutions and the establishment of 
	more transparent and pro-active 
	mechanisms for handling both staff and 
	student grievances.


6. 	Private tertiary institutions: Regulate 
	the quality of private tertiary 
	institutions and encourage them to 
	collaborate with the state and the 
	private sector to provide the manpower 
	needs of the country.


7. 	The CPP shall make Ghana the tertiary 
	education hub of the West African sub 
	region by expanding and modernizing 
	our educational infrastructure. By this, 
	we intend to raise a sizable amount of 
	government revenue from this venture.




CHAPTER III

Science and Technology Policy



For the CPP the poverty gap is a 
technology gap. The richest nations in the 
world are also the most technologically 
advanced, whilst the poorest nations have 
the lowest level of technological 
development. To place science and 
technology back at the centre of national 
development, the CPP will do the following:



1. 	Upgrade science and technology 
	facilities at all educational institutions 
	and complete the Science and 
	Technology Museum, which has been 
	under construction for years.


2. 	Resource the Council for Scientific and 
	Industrial Research (CSIR) to play a 
	more active role in national 
	development and establish a fund 
	solely for scientific research.


3. 	Set up the Ghana Global Science and 
	Technology Consortium (GGSTC) to 
	foster cooperation between Ghanaian 
	scientists at home and abroad.


4. 	Provide tax incentives to businesses to 
	apply scientific and technological 
	knowledge to industry and the larger 
	society.


5. 	Expand and improve the quality of the 
	University of Mines and Technology to 
	attract a bigger share of the 
	international student market while 
	offering first class education to 
	Ghanaians.


6. 	Organise Annual Science and 
	Technology Awards for students and 
	practioners both at home and abroad 
	in order to promote pre-tertiary and 
	tertiary science and technology 
	education.


7. 	Set up an expert panel to review all 
	scientific and social research conducted 
	in Ghana over the years to determine 
	what can be used in policy making and 
	national development.






CHAPTER IV

Health Policy


The CPP proposes a health policy that will 
be multi-sectoral, comprising the Ministry of 
Health (for health care), Ministry of Food 
and Agriculture (for nutrition), Ministry of 
Sports (for fitness) and the Ministry of Local 
Government and Rural Development (for 
sanitation), among others. Our overriding 
aim will be to reduce inequalities in 
standards of health care for all who need it. 
We will:


1. 	Give priority to improving our primary 
	health care services, especially in the 
	deprived communities in the inner 
	cities.


2. 	Continue to improve the ante-natal and 
	maternity services and develop our 
	child health services.


3. 	Recognise the importance of the 
	community health system and ensure 
	that they have the power and facilities 
	to operate.


4. 	Take a major public stake in the 
	pharmaceutical industry so as to ensure 
	that we focus on the production at 
	affordable prices drugs that are needed 
	to fight the most prevalent diseases 
	and drugs that the most vulnerable in 
	society need.


5. 	Decentralize the management of health 
	services to the districts.


6. 	Produce and enforce a comprehensive 
	Public Health Law that will improve 
	environmental sanitation, including the 
	training of sanitary inspectors.


7. 	Promote equity in quality health 
	services through improved access.


8. 	Promote preventive health service.


9. 	Promote health through better 
	nutrition and exercise.


10. 	Promote close collaboration between 
	orthodox and traditional medical 
	practioners.


11. 	Promote equitable distribution of 
	health personnel nationwide.


12. 	Broaden emergency services, including

	ambulance service, countrywide.


13. 	Increase the number of training

	institutions for producing all types of 
	health personnel and provide 
	continuing education for health 
	personnel.


14. 	Strengthen training institutions to 
	provide supervision and monitoring of 
	the performance of health personnel in 
	order to improve the quality of health 
	services.


15. 	Promote close collaboration between 
	training institutions and health service 
	personnel where trainers will practice 
	what they teach and health personnel 
	will teach what they practice.


16. 	Establish health desks at key ministries 
	listed above -- Food and Agriculture, 
	Sports, Local Government and Rural 
	Development ­ as well as Education, 
	and Water Resources for providing both 
	preventive and curative care.


17. 	Increase resources for local research 
	and development for both orthodox 
	and traditional medicine.


18. 	Provide additional incentives such as 
	the reduction in income taxes on 
	allowances for medical personnel who 
	work in rural or deprived areas so as to 
	increase access to health services in 
	those areas. This would be part of a 
	larger programme to improve 
	management in the health sector.


19. 	Intensify HIV-AIDS education, especially 
	among the youth, and make treatment 
	more affordable for those afflicted by 
	this deadly disease.


20. 	Expand facilities, under the Accelerated 
	Capital Investment Programme, to train 
	health personnel as a first step towards 
	combatting the brain-drain in the sector.


21. 	The CPP will ensure that the national


	

health insurance scheme will be 
	managed by health professional whiles 
	professional managers of money will 
	run the fund and it shall be totally 
	depoliticized.


22. 	The CPP shall make post graduate 
	education for Doctors free as in the 
	case of many countries that are 
	serious about retaining their health 
	professionals.


23. 	Give greater recognition to 
	traditional/herbal medical 
	practioners and occasionally award 
	honorary doctorates to practioners 
	advanced in herbal medical research.



CHAPTER V 

Human Resource 

Development, Employment and Labour Policies



The CPP's Human Resource Development 
(HRD) policy aims to create a 21 Century 
Labour Force made up of highly educated, 
highly motivated, highly industrious, and 
healthy workers in safe and modern work 
environments.


To ensure that this labour force is available 
for national development at all times, our 
HRD policy will include a migration policy 
that promotes the equitable distribution of 
skilled labour across the country as well as 
providing appropriate incentives for our 
trained professionals to stay at home and 
for those abroad to return home.


In this regard, we shall do the following, 
among others:



1. 	Job creation; CPP will launch the 
	Ghana Emergency Employment 
	Program (GEEP) aimed primarily at 
	the youth. We shall mobilize two 
	million youth for the mass tropical 
	almond tree project. Each of the two 
	million youth will be expected to plant 
	32 trees per person in an 8-hour work-
	day or 1,280 million trees in 20 days at 
	175 trees per hectare, meaning that a 
	total area of about 7,314,285.7 
	hectares would be planted to give us 
	almost 26 million tons of almonds. This 
	has the potential of generating billions 
	of US dollars for our economy. We have 
	the capacity to produce 30 million tons 
	of almond oil per the above analysis. 
	Multiply 30 million tons by $10 per liter 
	as world market price. Our economy 
	will potentially generate $300 billion.



2. 	Employment and earnings: Adopt a 
	National Labour Policy comprising 
	strategies for employment creation and 
	policies to ensure decent wages 
	nationwide.



3. 	National Employment Policy (NEP): 
	Accelerate the creation of a modern 
	labour market information system 
	(LMIS) to facilitate job search 
	nationwide, especially for the youth, 
	and implement other aspects of the 
	NEP by implementing its Action Plan.



4. 	National Occupational Safety and 
	Health (OSH) Policy: Pass the OSH Bill 
	and establish the National OSH 
	Administration (NOSHA) to improve 
	OSH standards and practices in all 
	workplaces nationwide.



5. 	Incomes Policy: Replace the Fair Wages 
	and Salaries Commission, which 
	focuses mostly on public sector wages, 
	with a National Incomes Commission 
	whose work will cover both the public

	
and private sectors as well as the 
	informal sector. The new commission, 
	among other things, will regularly 
	report on trends and undertake 
	research into all types of incomes (such 
	as workers, proprietors, rental, and 
	farmers income) in all the three sectors 
	nationwide, as well as the conditions 
	that influence changes in these 
	incomes.



6. 	Affirmative Action Policy: Enforce all 
	affirmative action and related laws that 
	promote gender equality and the rights 
	of persons with disabilities (PWDs).



7. 	Combatting Child Labour: Tackle the 
	persistent problem of child labour 
	within the context of existing laws and 
	international conventions by a tracking 
	the cultural and economic factors that 
	sustain the practice.



CHAPTER VI

Labour Quality Improvement



To ensure that the economy gets the 
required quantity and quality of workers, we 
shall pursue the following, among others: 
and improve the quality of employment and 
earnings



1. 	Invest in skills training by both state 
	and private institutions and align 
	training with the demands of the 
	economy.



2. 	Understanding Labour's challenges: 
	Promote labour studies in Ghana by 
	expanding and resourcing the existing 
	Labour College in Accra to 
	international standards for both 
	Ghanaian and foreign students.



CHAPTER VII

Benchmarking Productivity and Productivity Revolution



We will work with the Management 
Development and Productivity Institute 
(MDPI) to develop economy-wide indicators 
for productivity that will serve as the 
benchmark for determining wages and 
addressing the concerns of both labour and 
management. The CPP will restructure the 
MDPI as the centre piece of a national 
productivity revolution. To ensure that this 
productivity revolution is broad-based and 
successful, we shall solicit the opinions of 
the public on various socio-economic 
problems and how they believe we can 
solve them at the least cost possible.



CHAPTER VIII

Housing Policy



Affordable housing for owners and renters 
is one of the most important aspects of a 
responsive social policy.



The CPP promises to:


1. 	Work with the Building and Road 
	Research Institute, the Ghana Real 
	Estate Developers Association (GREDA) 
	and other stakeholders in the housing 
	industry to provide low-cost 
	technologies for building high-quality 
	and high-capacity homes and 
	apartments across the country.



2. 	Promote the development of the 
	mortgage industry to increase the rate 
	of home ownership in the country.



3. 	Strengthen the role of the State 
	Housing Corporation (SHC) in the 
	provision of affordable housing 
	throughout the country, including in 
	rural areas.



4. 	Work with the Ghana Institution 
	of 

Engineers and other relevant private 
	and public bodies to improve 
	standards and quality in the 
	engineering and construction 
	industry.



5. 	Remove tax holidays for the high-end 
	housing market and provide tax 
	incentives for mass occupancy 
	affordable housing for workers.



6. 	The CPP will pass the reviewed rent 
	control Act immediately we assume 
	office whereby no tenant will have to 
	pay more than six month rent to 
	landlords.



7. 	The CPP will restore social housing as 
	a responsibility of government and 
	will bring back projects like Kaneshie 
	estate, Efiakuma estates etc.



CHAPTER IX

Cultural Policy



For years, successive governments have 
paid lip service to the development of a 
national cultural policy with the result that 
we have no policy framework to guide the 
preservation and promotion of our culture 
beyond annual festivals.


The CPP will use culture as another arsenal 
to defeat tribalism and build a united 
country. An annual festival will be instituted 
that will enable all regions to display their 
rich cultures. The timing will be geared 
towards attracting tourists.


We shall build open theatres in all district 
capital to facilitate the staging of concerts 
and dramas. The state will earmark funds 
for such creative arts especially for plays 
that portray our culture, our history and our 
heroes so as to encourage patriotism and 
national unity.



The Ministry of Arts and Culture will be 
tasked to set up and fund a team of 
professional musicians and song writers to 
write and produce music and songs of 
patriotic themes and that will highlight our 
national values on commercially 
competitive basis. This will also serve as a 
means of reducing the use of indecent 
lyrics.



CPP Policy initiatives will include the 
following:



1. 	Promote healthy lifestyles (under our 
	health and nutritional security policies).



2. 	Foster a spirit of volunteerism by 
	requiring all students to undertake 
	volunteer work in their communities as 
	part of their education.



3. 	Encourage Ghanaians to celebrate the 
	virtues of the family, particularly the 
	importance of parental responsibility at 
	all stages of a child's life, through 
	various initiatives.



4. 	Teach the virtues of peaceful co-
	existence and the importance of 
	resolving our difference through non-
	violence.



5. 	Aggressively discourage and eliminate 
	harmful cultural practices, especially 
	those against women and children.



6. 	Promote Ghanaian and African 
	literature, including plays.



7. 	Promote and improve the quality of the 
	performing and visual arts.


CHAPTER X
 
Sports Policy





The CPP looks beyond the entertainment 
value of sports and considers sports as 
important factors in promoting good 
health, fostering a spirit of 
competitiveness, and celebrating 
excellence at home and abroad.


We shall encourage every community to 
have locations where they can enjoy actively 
participating in sports that require very little 
investment but offer mass participation.


Active participation in sports should develop 
healthy culture, enhance a sense of 
community and reduce the incidence of 
ailments arising from lack of physical 
activity.



1. 	Football: To address the current 
	problem of excessive focus on football 
	at the expense of other sports, we shall 
	consider putting professional 
	and amateur football under separate 
	administrative autonomous bodies.



2. 	Non-football sports: All non-football 
	sports will remain under the Ministry of 
	Sports to ensure that they get 
	the attention that has been denied them 
	for years.



3. 	Provide sporting facilities at the district 
	and national levels to facilitate the 
	development of both amateur and 
	professional sports. Relevant laws will 
	be enacted to ensure that any such 
	infrastructure is provided as an integral 
	part of socio-economic development.



4. 	Sports Studies ­ Set up a tertiary 
	institution of international standing for 	
	the study and teaching of sports and 
	specialised sports medicine.




CHAPTER XI

Media and Society



Within the context of the 1992 constitution, 
we pledge to uphold all the freedoms 
granted to the media in this country. But we 
also realise that with freedoms must come 
responsibilities and the assurance that 
media work conforms to the values of the 
society. In this regard, we shall do the 
following, among others:



1. 	Raising broadcast standards: Create a 
	Broadcast Standards Board (BSB) to 
	ensure that the nation's airwaves are 
	free of images and messages that 
	undermine our social and moral values, 
	such as the glorification of violence 
	and the degradation of women in 
	movies and music.



2. 	We will revamp the Ghana News 
	Agency as part of government's 
	comprehensive communication 
	practice for harnessing information 
	about the government and state for 
	building a viable, united and cohesive 
	nation-state.



3. 	Advertising in Ghana: 
· 	Outlaw the use of foreign-made 
	commercials on Ghanaian airwaves as a 
	way to help local media houses build 
	their capacity and create employment 
	while promoting a Ghanaian view of 
	social and economic reality. 

.	Regulate the quality of advertisements 
	to strike a balance between commercial 
	interests and social values.



4. 	Building media capacity: Work with 
	various professional organizations to 
	help raise the quality of media practice 
	in Ghana to world standards.



CHAPTER XII

Combating Violent Crime





The recent increase in violent crime around 
the country has resulted in loss of many 
lives and loss of property.



The CPP government will:



1. 	Take an "out of the box" approach to 
	building the mobility of the Police 
	during our first two years in office by 
	purchasing 2,000 motor bikes to ensure 
	that uniformed and hidden patrols can 
	reach every part of the country.



2. 	Provide the Police with resources 
	including walkie-talkies, vehicles, 
	intelligence gathering logistics, and 
	other material incentives to fight crime 
	in general and violent crime in 
	particular.



3. 	Resource the Judiciary to expedite the 
	dispensation of justice, and strengthen 
	existing laws to make penalties for 
	violent crime stiffer.



4. 	Launch public education on the social 
	costs of crime and encourage the public 
	through various rewards to help the 
	Police, such as reporting illegal 
	manufacturers or sellers of firearms.



5. 	Reform the prison system to equip 
	inmates with employable skills and thus 
	reduce the incidence of repeat crime by 
	ex-prisoners.



6. 	Create more employment 
	opportunities nation-wide, raise 
	incomes and help reduce the kind of 
	social inequities that create the 
	conditions for all kinds of crimes.



CHAPTER XIII

Confronting the Narcotics Menace



The CPP's first act would be to rid the 
security and related agencies of corrupt 
officials, implement existing 
recommendations for reforms, and then 
launch an anti-narcotics policy that 
encompasses Interception, Prosecution, 
Treatment, and Education.



1. 	Interception: Resource the Narcotics 
	Control Board and other agencies to 
	improve intelligence and interception 
	as well as collaborate with international 
	organizations to stem the flow of drugs.



2. 	Prosecution: Resource the Police, 
	Judiciary and other state agencies to 
	prosecute and punish drug-related 	
	offenders, particularly traffickers. Re-
	introduce stricter laws on the seizure of 
	properties acquired from drug 
	proceeds directly or indirectly.



3. 	Treatment: Resource existing 
	institutions and create new ones, if 
	necessary, to provide treatment for 
	drug abusers, particularly the youth. 
	We shall encourage civil society 
	organisations to do the same.



4. 	Public Education: Introduce drug-
	abuse education in schools as well as 
	launch a national public awareness 
	programme on radio, TV and other 
	media on the harmful effects of drug 
	abuse on individuals, families and 
	society.



CHAPTER XIV

Empowering Women


The CPP's record on combatting political 
exclusion of women has not been matched 
by any political party in our history. We 
pledge to continue this tradition of ensuring




political space for all women in the struggle
to liberate the country from poverty. 
Our agenda for gender equity will, 
therefore, be pursued on these fronts:



1. 	Tackle aggressively the root causes of 
	discrimination against women from 
	childhood (inter-generational gender 
	discrimination).



2. 	Use affirmative action policies to 
	address current discrimination against 
	women in all spheres of national life.



3. 	Uphold the United Nations Commission 
	on the Status of Women (CSW) 2030 
	Agenda officially known as 
	"Transforming our world: the 2030 
	Agenda for Sustainable Development."





4. 	Create a conducive environment for 
	gender-responsive implementation of 
	the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
	Development through passing and 
	implementing enabling laws and 
	policies, building solid institutional 
	infrastructure, providing financial 
	resources, strengthening participation 
	mechanisms, and investing in sex-
	disaggregated data to guide national 
	action.



5. 	Intensify efforts to remove 
	discrimina on against girls, and by 
	extension women, at all levels of the 
	educational system through increasing 
	resources to the relevant public and 
	non-public institutions.



6. 	Declare the growing incidence of 
	teenage pregnancy, especially 
	statutory rape against young girls, 
	many of them still in basic school, as a 
	national epidemic and set up a task 
	force to investigate the causes and 
	propose lasting solutions.



7. 	Enforce the Affirmative Action Policy 
	to deal with current discrimination 
	against women in various aspects of 
	national life.




CHAPTER XV 

Protecting our Children



The Ghanaian child remains vulnerable as 
indicated by the high infant and child 
mortality rates, the half-a-million children 
who are still out of school despite the 
introduction of the capitation grant, and the 
thousands more who continue to be 
trafficked across the country to work as 
slaves.


The CPP, in honouring the United Nation's 
Convention on the Child as well as various 
national laws, such as the Children's Act of 
1998, the Juvenile Justice Act of 2003, and 
the Human Trafficking Act of 2005 will 
consolidate all programmes, including The 
Child Cannot Wait action programme, that 
are designed to improve the welfare of the 
Ghanaian child and ensure that they are 
implemented fully.



Among specific actions to be taken to 
protect the Ghanaian child are:



1. 	Family Hours on Television to ensure 
	that adult programmes that can corrupt 
	the morals of children are shown only 
	late at night.



2. 	Introduce a Children's Budget to track 
	public resources devoted to the welfare 
	of the Ghanaian child, including 
	education and recreation.


CHAPTER XVI

Caring for the Aged



Article 37 (2) (b) of the 1992 Constitution 
enjoins government to take measures to 
protect various social groups, including the 
aged.


A CPP government will empower all relevant 
state institutions to ensure that all sectors, 
including civil society organisations, 
participate adequately in caring for the aged 
in Ghana. (Our agricultural policy deals with 
income security for farmers and fishermen 
in old age.)




CHAPTER XVII

Persons with Disability



Despite the passage of the Disability Act, 
2006 (Act 715), the disabled ­ PWDs ­ in 
Ghana continue to face serious 
discrimination and institutional 
impediments to their efforts to contribute 
to national development. Physical access to 
buildings, including government ones, 
remains limited.


The CPP will introduce a number of 
interventions that are designed to give 
full effect and impetus to the Disability Act. 
We will make sure that the Disability Act and 
the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities are fully implemented with 
the speed of light. We shall go further to 
ensure that the dignity of PWDs is protected 
and enhanced. We shall leave no stone 
unturned.



The CPP pledges to do the following:



1. 	Enhance and adequately fund the 
	National Council of Persons with 
	Disabilities.



2. 	Decentralise the activities of the 
	National Council of Persons with 
	Disabilities to improve access to and 
	quality of service at the local level.



3. 	Institute the right to free education: 
	PWDs will be given free education at 
	public institutions, and the required 
	resources, materials and facilities will 
	be given to ensure unhindered access 
	and facilitate their education.





4. 	District Assessment centres will be 
	established and/or properly resourced 
	to among other things ensure early 
	childhood detection of Disability. Under 
	the NHIS, health care for PWD's with 
	certain health conditions or illnesses 
	will be free.



5. 	All public employers would be 
	legislated to ensure that at least 5.0 
	per cent of their workforce are PWDs. 
	Private Employers' will be given tax 
	incentives for employing PWDs as 5.0 
	per cent of their workforce. National 
	Employment Centres will also have 
	special Disability desks.



6. 	The CPP will increase the disability 
	common fund allocation to 5%, 
	and ensure its timely payment into 
	separate accounts for this purpose.



7. 	Establish community-based 
	rehabilitation and employment support 
	centres for the disabled as a means of 
	enhancing their skill and capacity.



8. 	Transportation shall be made 
	progressively free for PWD's.



9. 	The CPP will ensure that PWD's in 
	need of personal assistants will be 
	provided them free.



10. 	Parents of children with Disabilities 
	will be provided with both legal and 
	economic support.



11. 	Women with Disabilities will be given 
	special attention due to their 
	additional challenges as women and 
	as women with disability.



CHAPTER XVIII

Developing our Youth



The CPP values the youth because they are 
the ones who will run this country when the 
current generation of leaders retire and 
pass on.



Our youth development strategy thus is 
both comprehensive and forward-looking, 
as outlined below:



1. 	Create opportuni es for young people 
	to channel their youthful energies into 
	creative and socially desirable ends by 
	requiring every district to provide 
	Youth Activities Centres (YACs). These 
	centres will contain facilities for sports, 
	ICT centres, libraries, and counselling 
	services that are designed to prevent 
	the youth from falling victim to socially 
	harmful activities such as drug abuse, 
	alcoholism, and pre-marital sex, all of 
	which have been on the rise in recent times.



2. 	Launch the State of the Youth Report 
	to serve as a guide for implementation 
	of youth development programmes. 
	The report will be produced every two 
	years with the active participation of 
	the youth and other stakeholders.



3. 	Other youth development initiatives 
	are embedded in our social policies 
	such as education, sports, and human 
	resource development.


CHAPTER XIX

Bridging the North-South Divide



A CPP government will launch a special 
development agenda under the Office of 
the President to put forward time-bound 
strategies and initiatives for 
creating employment and other economic 
opportunities in the north in line with





ECONIMIC [sic] POLICIES



Taking economic growth and development 
as our central task is vital to invigorating our 
nation and is the fundamental requirement 
for lasting stability of the nation.


First, we take public ownership as the 
foundation of our economic philosophy. It is 
the basic force of the state that is used to 
guide and promote economic and social 
development. It is also a major guarantor 
for realizing the fundamental interests and 
the common prosperity of the majority of 
the people.


The state sector will be strengthened by the 
consolidation of state enterprises into large 
industrial champions with the goal of 
consolidating effort and creating 
internationally competitive national 
industries.


The state will focus on the 'commanding 
heights' of the economy with a growing 
private sector working in partnership with 
the state to industrialise.


The country will create the right regulatory 
framework that will promote inclusive 
growth beneficial to the majority of our 
citizens.


The CPP identifies under-production and 
unemployment as the greatest 
impediments to economic prosperity. 
Inflation is the cause as well as the effect of 
economic under performance. 
Unlike the NDC and NPP that see nothing 
wrong with the development of an aid 
dependent economy, the CPP from the 
perspective of our Nkrumaist philosophy of 
self-determination is committed to 
achieving economic independence:


An economy that is led by the state in 
partnership with the private sector for the


benefit of the broad masses of workers, 
students and the ordinary individual on the 
street.


An economy that is internally sustainable, an 
economy that will provide full employment, 
develop our human capabilities and the 
productive resources of our nation to 
transform our society.


This will be the fulfilment of our 
responsibility to achieve political and 
economic freedom so as to regain our 
dignity and self-respect and mitigate 
impoverishment that the NDC and the NPP 
have imposed on our economic and social 
development.


Our priority is to restore macroeconomic 
stability and to generate inclusive growth. 
This means making further efforts toward 
fiscal adjustment by taking concerted action 
at fiscal consolidation that is tilted towards 
supporting local industry and exports in 
order to balance our external trade.


We will seek to control inflation through 
pragmatic monetary and fiscal policies 
which will lead to a reduction in interest 
rates catalysing the private sector producing 
consequential growth and jobs.


We will invest intelligently in new factories 
that will substitute for imports and provide 
competitive products for our exports.


We will invest in cocoa plantations and value 
addition. These plantations will serve as 
model farms and will showcase best practice 
for other farmers. We will also invest heavily 
in tropical almond, bamboo, sheanuts, 
mango and cashew plantations to form the 
foundation of our agro industry for export



markets and to reduce dependency on 
cocoa.


These structural reforms will be necessary 
for improving the resilience of the economy 
particularly its ability to withstand shocks. 
The shortfalls in electricity supply that have 
led to what is popularly called 'dumsor' in 
the last few years has damaged the private 
sector extensively. We will resolve this 
condition by encouraging and supporting 
value for money investments in generation, 
transmission and distribution.


Unlike the NDC and NPP governments we 
will meet our financial obligations to the 
public energy institutions to help them 
deliver on their mandate. 
In order to manage the economy well, the 
CPP will do the following:



CHAPTER XX

National Development Planning



We will support the National Development 
Planning Commission (NDPC) to ensure 
effective national development planning. 
To this end, the CPP has been supportive of 
the 40-year development plan.



CHAPTER XXI

Macroeconomic Policies



We will take whatever measures that are 
necessary to maintain macroeconomic 
stability by:



CHAPTER XXII

Monetary Policy:



We will work with the Bank of Ghana (BoG) 
to strengthen Ghana's monetary policy and 
to continue reforms in the banking and 
financial sector, including improved 
oversight of banking and financial 
institutions and the passage and 
implementation of laws to protect the 
welfare of consumer.



1. 	Lowering Interest rates: We shall 
work with the BoG to induce our banks to 
bring down interest rates to reasonable and 
realistic levels for businesses, entrepreneurs 
and workers in both the formal and 
informal sectors. Lower interest rates will 
also make available long term funds for 
investment.



2. 	Mobilizing Private Sector 
financing: We will encourage the BoG to 
implement a new regulation that caps the 
percentage of Government assets held on 
the banking sectors balance sheet and turn 
that capital towards financing the private 
sector.



3. 	State-owned 
banks/development banks: We will review 
the mandate of the state-owned banks to 
ensure that wehave development banks 
again. We shall reform state-owned banks, 
including by listing them on the Ghana 
Stock Exchange, to deepen their capacity to 
finance national development and make 
them internationally competive. 
Where possible, we shall encourage them to 
venture into foreign markets, just as foreign 
banks are venturing into the Ghanaian 
banking sector.



4. 	Rural banks: We shall work with 
the central bank to strengthen the capacity 
of rural banks to finance rural agricultural 
and non-agricultural activities. Among other 
things, this calls for increased governance 
and transparency in the management and 
supervision of rural banks.




CHAPTER XXIII

Fiscal Policy:



Fiscal policy involves taxation, spending of 
the revenue from taxation, and 
management of the public debt.





The CPP will institute a programme to 
improve the overall public 
financial management of government 
revenue from all sources. It is important 
that we manage both oil and non-oil 
revenue efficiently and transparently to 
create public confidence in the managers of 
the economy.



1. 	An efficient and equitable tax 
regime: Despite many years of reform, the 
tax system in Ghana remains susceptible to 
abuse, especially by large companies which 
evade taxes through many means. This 
situation is compounded by big tax 
concessions often given to foreign investors 
without similar concessions to Ghanaian 
businesses. All these practices deprive the 
state of billions of Ghana Cedis every year, 
more than what we receive in foreign aid. 
By plugging these loopholes, we can reduce 
our dependence on donors while we 
improve our ability to finance our 
development and grow our economy.



2. 	Improving public expenditure. 
Hard as it is to believe, nobody knows 
exactly how many people are on 
government's payroll at any given time. 
The result has been massive waste and the in 
public expenditure. An estimated 25 per 
cent of salary expenditures and 50 per 
cent of non-salary expenditures in the 
education sector alone do not reach their 
intended beneficiaries. The CPP will first 
undertake a comprehensive census of the 
public sector and introduce systems and 
benchmarks to deal with this problem. 
The National Identification System which we 
intend to implement will be greatly helpful 
in this regard.



3. 	Managing petroleum revenue:


CPP will review and/or repeal the 
petroleum bill that adopts the royalty tax 
system (Re-shaped into what is called the 
Ghana hybrid system) as the mechanism 
for benefitting from her our oil resources.


Instead, CPP shall adopt the Production 
Sharing Formula for the distribution of oil 
revenues and benefits. If Ghana had 
adopted this formula for the recent oil 
find, she would have earned over US $9 
billion from her oil resources between 
2010/2015, representing 60% of total 
production revenue of over US $15 
billion.


Compare this to the paltry US $3 billion 
earned over the same period (under the 
royalty tax system) representing 19.4% of 
total production revenue. We will manage 
the revenue from Ghana's petroleum sector 
strictly in accordance with the Petroleum 
Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815).



4. 	Debt policy and management: 
Our debt policy will be driven by our 
development needs and our capacity to 
repay through high economic growth and 
improved tax administra on. Our debt 
policy will not be driven by donor 
benchmarks that ignore our development 
needs and undermine our ability to finance 
our development. We shall also improve 
our capacity for debt analysis and 
management, a deficiency which impedes 
our ability to raise funds both locally and 
externally to finance our development.



5. 	Transparency and 
Accountability: We shall require timely and 
consistent monthly and quarterly 
publication of public finances by national 
and local government tax agencies.




CHAPTER XXIV

Exchange Rate Policy:



A CPP government will encourage and 
collaborate with the BoG to keep the value 
of the Cedi relatively stable by ensuring 
good balance of payment performance and 
intervening in the foreign exchange market 
when necessary.



CHAPTER XXV

Agricultural and Rural Transformation Policies


The NDC government's attitude towards 
agriculture has been one of neglect which 
has resulted in continuing decline.


The CPP's agricultural policy will focus on 
attaining food security and nutrition for the 
nation, income security for farmers and 
fishermen, and self-sufficiency in industrial 
sectors that depend on forest and 
agricultural products for their work.


The emphasis will be on the use of science 
and bio-technology to mechanize and 
modernize agriculture. We will of course 
have nothing to do with GMO's. 
Specific policy initiatives will include the 
following:



CHAPTER XXVI

Food, Fisheries and Livestock Sub-Sectors



The main goals shall be to:


1. Facilitate easy acquisition and 
utilization of land for agricultural 
purposes, including fish farming and 
ranching.



2. It has been observed that with cheap 
almond nut cake protein, we could 
transform the entire Volta lake area 
into the largest fish pond in the world.



3. We shall set up the first tropical 
almond research institute with the 
view of advancing research in this 
area which has beneficial forward and 
backward linkages.



4. Increase state resource allocation, such 
as subsidised inputs, technical 
assistance and price support to farmers 
and fishermen, etc.



5. Increase support for the Extension 
Service to provide services for the 
farmers.



6. Increase resources to various 
agricultural colleges and research 
institutes, such as the Food Research 
Institute the Crop Research Institute 
and Soil Research Institute to enhance 
their support activities for the sector.



7. Encourage and resource the University 
of Development Studies (UDS) to 
expand specialist studies of rural 
economies and societies in order to 
shape public policy.



8. Expand agricultural insurance schemes 
as part of basic broad programme to 
improve farmers' access to credit.



9. Establish a Co-operative Investment 
Bank. Development agencies and local 
authorities will be empowered to 
support and to help establish co-
operatives.



10. Restructure the agricultural sector to 
include a Food Distribution Board and 
Agricultural Marketing Agency. 
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
(MoFA) will continue to support 
production through extension and 
technical services.



11. Support the development and 
strengthening of Farmer-Based 
Organisations (FBOs) as well as 
cooperatives to give farmers easy 
access to affordable credit and offer 
them other forms of capacity-building 
assistance, such as subsidised literacy


and numeracy classes as well as basic 
business management skills.



12. Develop, in collabora on with farmers, 
agricultural infrastructure, such as 
irrigation systems; fish preservation 
and processing facilities; silos; as well 
as standard infrastructure like 
electricity, telephones, water, roads, 
and affordable housing.



13. Develop a National Nutrition Policy 
based on common foodstuffs in Ghana 
as a way of promoting healthy lifestyles 
while raising the incomes of our 
farmers and fishermen. The Food 
Research Institute will be tasked to 
improve food preparation methods to 
make preparation of Ghanaian cuisine 
less time-consuming.



14. Develop a Farmers and Fishermen 
Income Security Scheme (FFISSH) to 
protect them against old age poverty, 
especially in the rural and coastal 
areas.



15. Adopt a fisheries policy to guide the 
development of sector.



16. Increase the production of corn, soya-
bean, ground nuts, millet and 
sorghum to substitute for hops barley 
and wheat in beer, flour, edible oil 
and poultry production. There is a 
potential savings of about $600m in 
imports.



17. Promote the production of roots and 
tubers to compete with the 
consumption of imported rice in the 
food sector.



18. Increase the cultivation of industrial 
sugar cane for the production of 
sugar, biofuel and food grade 
ethanol. Current import expenditure 
on this item, which exceeds $200m, 
will be retained in the domestic 
economy for the benefit of our 
farmers.



19. We shall encourage the growing of 
bast-fibre to produce jute sacks 
saving 300 million dollars otherwise 
paid other countries.



CHAPTER XXVII

Cocoa Sub-Sector


We shall intensify cocoa produc on and 
processing to meet current global supply 
deficits.


We shall undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of the entire value chain in the 
cocoa sector, including production, 
purchasing, quality control, transportation, 
shipping and administration, to guarantee 
the continued viability of the sector and 
ensure that all stakeholders in the sector, 
especially farmers, get their fair share of 
returns from the production and sale of 
cocoa and its products.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Forestry and Tree Crops Sub-Sectors:




We shall intensify current programmes such 
as replanting (and the provision of 
alternative income sources such as livestock 
breeding to rural dwellers) to preserve our 
forests. To this end, we will introduce a 
nation-wide tree planting exercise notably 
almond trees with the view of safeguarding 
the environment and preventing the 
adverse effect of climate change. Through 
this, we shall create employment, provide 
alternative energy sources, and raise the 
incomes for a large section of the 
population, especially the youth, in a 
relatively short period. The Forest Products 
Research Institute will be funded to enable 
the establishment of a pulp and paper 
industry using local raw materials to satisfy 
the country's pulp and paper needs and for 
export.





We will also intensify the cultivation of 
almond, bamboo, cashew, sheanuts and 
coffee to diversify our agricultural export 
commodity sector.
