IVOR KOBINA GREENSTREET (Presidential candidate of the Convention People's Party (CPP))

NANA GABBYS NKETIAH
(Vice Presidential candidate of the Convention People's Party (CPP))



Title: The CPP Manifesto

Author: Edmund Nminyem Delle 


FOREWORD 								 V

I. INTRODUCTION 							VI

II. OUR VISION FOR GHANA 					       VII

III. NKRUMAISM IS THE ANSWER					       VII
CONTENTS

A. SOCIAL POLICIES 							IX


CHAPTER								      PAGE
I. 	Education Policy 						 9

II.	Tertiary Institutions 						10

III	Science and Technology Policy 					11

IV	Health Policy 							12

V	Human Resource 						 	13

VI	Labour Quality Improvement 					14

VII	Benchmarking Productivity and Productivity Revolution: 		14

VIII	Housing Policy 							14

IX	Cultural Policy 						15

X	Sports Policy							15

XI	Media and Society 						16

XII	Combating Violent Crime 					16

XIII	Confronting the Narcotics Menace 				17

XIV	Empowering Women		 				17

XV	Protecting our Children 					18

XVI	Caring for the Aged 						19

XVII	Persons with Disability 					19

XVIII	Developing our Youth						20

XIX	Bridging the North-South Divide 				20


B. ECONOMIC POLICIES 							21

XX	National Development Planning 					23

XXI	Macroeconomic Policies 						23

XXII	Monetary Policy

XXIII	Fiscal Policy

XXIV	Exchange Rate Policy

XXV	Agricultural and Rural Transformation Policies 			25

XXVI	Food, Fisheries and Livestock Sub-Sectors 			25

XXVII	Cocoa Sub-Sector 						26

XXVIII	Forestry and Tree Crops Sub-Sectors: 				26

XXIX	Agro-processing 						27

XXX	Rural Transformation 						27

XXXI	Industrial Policies 						27



          


XXXII	Private Sector Development and Partnership: 			28

XXXIII	Mining and Quarrying Policy 					29

XXXIV	Manufacturing Policy 						29

XXXV	Energy Policy 							30

XXXVI	Construction Policy 						31

XXXVII	Service Sector Policies 					32

XXXVIII	Environment and Natural Resources 				33

XXXIX	Natural Environment 						33

XL	The Built Environment 						33

XLI	Natural Resources 						33

XLII	Financing Development 						33



C. RESPONSIVE GOVERNANCE 						35

XLIII	Beyond Good Governance 						35

XLIV	Fighting Corruption 						35

XLV	Devolution of Power and Increasing Social Accountability 	36

XLVI	The Constitution Review Process 				36

XLVII	Legislative Agenda 						37

XLVIII	Referenda 							37

XLIX	Role of Traditional Leaders 					37

L	Public Sector Reforms and Innovation 				38

LI	National Security 						38

LII	Judicial Reforms 						39



D. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 						41

LIII	Ghana and Globalisation 					41

LIV	Ghanaian Diaspora and Political Participation 			41

LV	International Professionals Forum of Ghana 			41

LVI	Relations with African Countries 				42

LVII	Relations with non-Ghanaian Diaspora 				42

LVIII	Relations with Donors 						42

LIX	Relations with Rest of the World 				42



E. JOIN US 								43

F. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 							43




The sense of purpose and urgency which the CPP brought to national development has 
essentially been missing since 1966. It is time we restore it. Our people can wait no longer. 

This manifesto answers our people's cry for a new covenant ( Apamfoforo )in Ghana. We believe 
that the State has a binding commitment to use its power to promote high rates of economic 
growth and development as well as to ensure that the wealth thereof is shared equitably among
Ghanaians ­ North and South, East and West. 

We aspire to work together with all Ghanaians to create a prosperous, just, safe, caring and 
united society where there is adequate food and shelter for all and there are ample 
opportunities for every Ghanaian to develop his or her personal and social potential to its fullest. 
We shall instil in our people a culture of discipline and excellence, respect for law and order, 
compassion towards one another, and the idea that we are one people with a common destiny. 

We believe that unless political power is placed in the hands of the CPP the search for real and 
lasting solutions to our political and social economic problems will remain elusive. God Bless 
Our Homeland Ghana. Forward Ever Backward Never!


				THE CPP MANIFESTO
					By
				EDMUND NMINYEM DELLE
 
National Chairman and Leader of the Convention People's Party. (CPP)


INTRODUCTION



This policy document reflects the views and intentions of the Conven on People's Party (CPP) 
on various development issues of domestic and international importance. They cover four 
broad areas of development, namely:

A. Social Policies

B. Economic Policies

C. Responsive Governance

D. International Relations


Within these policy areas the Party has identified four short-term priority areas that it 
will address immediately after it is re-elected into office. 
These areas are:

1. 	Job creation, with the launching of the Ghana Emergency Employment Programme 
	(GEEP) aimed primarily at the youth.

2. 	Essential social services such as providing affordable housing, water, electricity, 
	food, transport and sanitation.

3. 	Public safety, in other words combatting the armed robbery menace, the rise in 
	sexual violence against women and children, and the fatalities on our roads.

4. 	Managing our natural resources, The CPP intends to review and/or repeal/ 
	renegotiate all contracts which are not in the best interest of the country. By this we 
	intend to maximise our long term earnings to the benefit of our people.


Our overall development policies are informed by the Party's ideology of Nkrumaism, 
	whose

three main principles are:


1. 	Self-determination: We must re-assert control over our natural resources and 
	exercise national interest for the sustainable and equitable development of our 
	country.


2. 	Social Justice: The State has a moral and constitutional duty to promote equal 
	opportunity and equitable rewards for all Ghanaians, irrespective of age, gender, 
	ethnic, religious, political or other background.


3. 	Pan-Africanism: We must work with Africans at home and abroad to find the 
	common solutions to our common problems of racism, poverty, exploitation and 
	under development.



The implementation of the policies proposed herein will be based on a series of medium-
term plans to be developed by a CPP government. These plans will reflect both the party's 
ideology and the Directive Principles of State Policy, which constitute a national vision 
agreed by all Ghanaians in the 1992 constitution.

6


OUR VISION FOR GHANA
The first national asset of any country is its people, and they make their own history in the 
process of labouring to control and appropriate nature. 

The CPP shall therefore relate to the Ghanaian people drawn from across the length and breadth 
of our national territory as productive beings and not as ethnic or racial entities. 

The people shall constitute the resilient and ultimate base of all policies of the party. 
The CPP's vision is to build a just and prosperous society on the basis of a strong and diversified 
economy in a democratic environment. 

Our party is a profoundly democratic one, rooted in the belief that individuals can only reach 
their full potential in a society that embodies the values of liberty, equality, and solidarity. 

Only through creating material and cultural bonds of solidarity across racial, gender, age and 
class lines can true equality of opportunity be achieved. 

The CPP's vision for Ghana in one generation is to become a high middle-income country in a 
society that is just, safe, caring, united and prosperous, where there is adequate food, shelter, 
and opportunities for every Ghanaian, and where democratic and economic governance is 
devolved to the local level. We believe our nation should be built on a set of values that will 
ensure the birth of a new citizen who places the interest of the nation above self and the creation 
of a community that is 'fair for all'.


NKRUMAISM IS THE ANSWER



Who are we? 
The CPP is an Nkrumaist party and our philosophy is Nkrumaism. As Nkrumaists we are ever 
concerned with multiplying and strengthening our contact with the masses of the people and 
winning their confidence as their defenders against the evils of poverty, disease, hunger, 
ignorance and squalor. As Nkrumaists we strive to build a society that is just and fair for all.


CHAPTER I

Education Policy

For the CPP, education serves a multiple 
purpose of aiding the individual to better 
understand society and nature, and to 
acquire the skills needed to earn a decent 
living and contribute to national 
development. We intend to improve access 
to and quality of education and training for 
all Ghanaians.



Under our Accelerated Education Sector 
Investment Programme (AESIP) 
educational facilities from kindergarten to 
the tertiary level will be refurbished and 
expanded to meet the needs of a growing 
population and modernising society.


The CPP will do the following:



1. Significantly reduce income taxes for 
teachers (and health personnel) and 
give other incentives to those who 
work in rural areas and places 
designated as "deprived".



2. Continue to ensure that teachers are 
paid well and that those who need 
training receive them through every 
available and affordable means, 
including distance learning.



3. Use tax incentives for the private sector, 
especially financial institutions, to build 
school infrastructure in particular areas 
of the country and lease that 
infrastructure to the state for a 
specified period, after which they 
become state property.



4. Improve working conditions of 
teachers, including timely payment of 
salaries for new and current teachers 
and offering a attractive home-ownership 
packages.


5. Improve education content and 
administration as well as learning 
processes by strengthening 
decentralisation to give local 
administrators the authority to deal 
with local problems promptly without 
waiting for directives from the regional 
capitals or Accra.



6. Accelerate on-going programmes to 
increase the number of teachers in our 
classrooms while training others 
already in the classrooms with 
minimum disruption for teachers and 
students.



7. Build an educational system that does 
not only provide academic and life skills 
but inculcates in our children a high 
degree of self-esteem, personal 
responsibility, civic duty, patriotism 
and community service (volunteerism).



8. Strengthen academic and career 
counselling at all levels of the 
educational system.



To meet the expanded educa on needs of a 
growing population, the CPP will do the 
following in collaboration with the non-state 
sector, including religious organisations:



1. We will invest heavily in infrastructure 
and most importantly, the provision of 
equipment for teaching of science and 
technology and in improving the quality 
of teaching.



2. We will raise the school leaving age to 
18 years, make secondary school part 
of basic educa on and free, in order 
to improve access and quality at all 
levels throughout the country. 
Furthermore, we will actively promote 
boarding schools as a way of 
encouraging Ghanaians from all walks 
of life to live together and know each 
other before they enter the world of 
work, as this is one of the surest ways 
of fighting ethnocentrism and creating 
a common sense of nationhood among 
our future leaders.



3. Make vocational and technical 
education mostly
post-secondary to 
ensure that those attending 
vocational 
and technical schools are properly

prepared academically. Resources will 
be increased
to all vocational and 
technical schools under the AESIP.



4. We will establish new Industrial 
Training Boards in every region tasked 
to increase the range of training 
opportunities for school leavers. 
They will not just be concerned with the 
traditional craft skills, but also deal with 
the office, the shop, the farm and the factory.

CHAPTER II



Tertiary Institutions:


The CPP will expand and improve the 
quality of facilities at all tertiary institutions 
under AESIP to world class levels in order to 
gain a greater share of the international 
education market.



We will introduce an international distance 
learning scheme that will allow Ghanaian 
lecturers abroad to teach some classes in 
Ghana by the internet or satellite.



1. 	Public tertiary institutions: Set up 
	regional campuses for all state 
	universities and other tertiary 
	institutions to improve access and
	
	

reduce the cost of higher education to 
	households.


2. 	Decentralize teaching and other 
	specialized training for all universities 
	with an established capacity to offer 
	such training. This too will improve 
	access and reduce the pressure on 
	facilities and staff of the specialized 
	institutions.

3. 	Introduce professional managers with 
	experience of managing large private or 
	public organizations to head state 
	universities. This will free academics to 
	concentrate on teaching and research 
	and improve the quality of leadership 
	at these institutions.


4. 	Give students the opportunity to assess 
	and rate their lecturers regularly in 
	order to improve the quality of tertiary 
	education.


5. 	Enhance governance through quarterly 
	publication of financial and 
	management reports of tertiary 
	institutions and the establishment of 
	more transparent and pro-active 
	mechanisms for handling both staff and 
	student grievances.


6. 	Private tertiary institutions: Regulate 
	the quality of private tertiary 
	institutions and encourage them to 
	collaborate with the state and the 
	private sector to provide the manpower 
	needs of the country.


7. 	The CPP shall make Ghana the tertiary 
	education hub of the West African sub 
	region by expanding and modernizing 
	our educational infrastructure. By this, 
	we intend to raise a sizable amount of 
	government revenue from this venture.




CHAPTER III

Science and Technology Policy



For the CPP the poverty gap is a 
technology gap. The richest nations in the 
world are also the most technologically 
advanced, whilst the poorest nations have 
the lowest level of technological 
development. To place science and 
technology back at the centre of national 
development, the CPP will do the following:



1. 	Upgrade science and technology 
	facilities at all educational institutions 
	and complete the Science and 
	Technology Museum, which has been 
	under construction for years.


2. 	Resource the Council for Scientific and 
	Industrial Research (CSIR) to play a 
	more active role in national 
	development and establish a fund 
	solely for scientific research.


3. 	Set up the Ghana Global Science and 
	Technology Consortium (GGSTC) to 
	foster cooperation between Ghanaian 
	scientists at home and abroad.


4. 	Provide tax incentives to businesses to 
	apply scientific and technological 
	knowledge to industry and the larger 
	society.


5. 	Expand and improve the quality of the 
	University of Mines and Technology to 
	attract a bigger share of the 
	international student market while 
	offering first class education to 
	Ghanaians.


6. 	Organise Annual Science and 
	Technology Awards for students and 
	practioners both at home and abroad 
	in order to promote pre-tertiary and 
	tertiary science and technology 
	education.


7. 	Set up an expert panel to review all 
	scientific and social research conducted 
	in Ghana over the years to determine 
	what can be used in policy making and 
	national development.






CHAPTER IV

Health Policy


The CPP proposes a health policy that will 
be multi-sectoral, comprising the Ministry of 
Health (for health care), Ministry of Food 
and Agriculture (for nutrition), Ministry of 
Sports (for fitness) and the Ministry of Local 
Government and Rural Development (for 
sanitation), among others. Our overriding 
aim will be to reduce inequalities in 
standards of health care for all who need it. 
We will:


1. 	Give priority to improving our primary 
	health care services, especially in the 
	deprived communities in the inner 
	cities.


2. 	Continue to improve the ante-natal and 
	maternity services and develop our 
	child health services.


3. 	Recognise the importance of the 
	community health system and ensure 
	that they have the power and facilities 
	to operate.


4. 	Take a major public stake in the 
	pharmaceutical industry so as to ensure 
	that we focus on the production at 
	affordable prices drugs that are needed 
	to fight the most prevalent diseases 
	and drugs that the most vulnerable in 
	society need.


5. 	Decentralize the management of health 
	services to the districts.


6. 	Produce and enforce a comprehensive 
	Public Health Law that will improve 
	environmental sanitation, including the 
	training of sanitary inspectors.


7. 	Promote equity in quality health 
	services through improved access.


8. 	Promote preventive health service.


9. 	Promote health through better 
	nutrition and exercise.


10. 	Promote close collaboration between 
	orthodox and traditional medical 
	practioners.


11. 	Promote equitable distribution of 
	health personnel nationwide.


12. 	Broaden emergency services, including

	ambulance service, countrywide.


13. 	Increase the number of training

	institutions for producing all types of 
	health personnel and provide 
	continuing education for health 
	personnel.


14. 	Strengthen training institutions to 
	provide supervision and monitoring of 
	the performance of health personnel in 
	order to improve the quality of health 
	services.


15. 	Promote close collaboration between 
	training institutions and health service 
	personnel where trainers will practice 
	what they teach and health personnel 
	will teach what they practice.


16. 	Establish health desks at key ministries 
	listed above -- Food and Agriculture, 
	Sports, Local Government and Rural 
	Development ­ as well as Education, 
	and Water Resources for providing both 
	preventive and curative care.


17. 	Increase resources for local research 
	and development for both orthodox 
	and traditional medicine.


18. 	Provide additional incentives such as 
	the reduction in income taxes on 
	allowances for medical personnel who 
	work in rural or deprived areas so as to 
	increase access to health services in 
	those areas. This would be part of a 
	larger programme to improve 
	management in the health sector.


19. 	Intensify HIV-AIDS education, especially 
	among the youth, and make treatment 
	more affordable for those afflicted by 
	this deadly disease.


20. 	Expand facilities, under the Accelerated 
	Capital Investment Programme, to train 
	health personnel as a first step towards 
	combatting the brain-drain in the sector.


21. 	The CPP will ensure that the national


	

health insurance scheme will be 
	managed by health professional whiles 
	professional managers of money will 
	run the fund and it shall be totally 
	depoliticized.


22. 	The CPP shall make post graduate 
	education for Doctors free as in the 
	case of many countries that are 
	serious about retaining their health 
	professionals.


23. 	Give greater recognition to 
	traditional/herbal medical 
	practioners and occasionally award 
	honorary doctorates to practioners 
	advanced in herbal medical research.



CHAPTER V 

Human Resource 

Development, Employment and Labour Policies



The CPP's Human Resource Development 
(HRD) policy aims to create a 21 Century 
Labour Force made up of highly educated, 
highly motivated, highly industrious, and 
healthy workers in safe and modern work 
environments.


To ensure that this labour force is available 
for national development at all times, our 
HRD policy will include a migration policy 
that promotes the equitable distribution of 
skilled labour across the country as well as 
providing appropriate incentives for our 
trained professionals to stay at home and 
for those abroad to return home.


In this regard, we shall do the following, 
among others:



1. 	Job creation; CPP will launch the 
	Ghana Emergency Employment 
	Program (GEEP) aimed primarily at 
	the youth. We shall mobilize two 
	million youth for the mass tropical 
	almond tree project. Each of the two 
	million youth will be expected to plant 
	32 trees per person in an 8-hour work-
	day or 1,280 million trees in 20 days at 
	175 trees per hectare, meaning that a 
	total area of about 7,314,285.7 
	hectares would be planted to give us 
	almost 26 million tons of almonds. This 
	has the potential of generating billions 
	of US dollars for our economy. We have 
	the capacity to produce 30 million tons 
	of almond oil per the above analysis. 
	Multiply 30 million tons by $10 per liter 
	as world market price. Our economy 
	will potentially generate $300 billion.



2. 	Employment and earnings: Adopt a 
	National Labour Policy comprising 
	strategies for employment creation and 
	policies to ensure decent wages 
	nationwide.



3. 	National Employment Policy (NEP): 
	Accelerate the creation of a modern 
	labour market information system 
	(LMIS) to facilitate job search 
	nationwide, especially for the youth, 
	and implement other aspects of the 
	NEP by implementing its Action Plan.



4. 	National Occupational Safety and 
	Health (OSH) Policy: Pass the OSH Bill 
	and establish the National OSH 
	Administration (NOSHA) to improve 
	OSH standards and practices in all 
	workplaces nationwide.



5. 	Incomes Policy: Replace the Fair Wages 
	and Salaries Commission, which 
	focuses mostly on public sector wages, 
	with a National Incomes Commission 
	whose work will cover both the public

	
and private sectors as well as the 
	informal sector. The new commission, 
	among other things, will regularly 
	report on trends and undertake 
	research into all types of incomes (such 
	as workers, proprietors, rental, and 
	farmers income) in all the three sectors 
	nationwide, as well as the conditions 
	that influence changes in these 
	incomes.



6. 	Affirmative Action Policy: Enforce all 
	affirmative action and related laws that 
	promote gender equality and the rights 
	of persons with disabilities (PWDs).



7. 	Combatting Child Labour: Tackle the 
	persistent problem of child labour 
	within the context of existing laws and 
	international conventions by a tracking 
	the cultural and economic factors that 
	sustain the practice.



CHAPTER VI

Labour Quality Improvement



To ensure that the economy gets the 
required quantity and quality of workers, we 
shall pursue the following, among others: 
and improve the quality of employment and 
earnings



1. 	Invest in skills training by both state 
	and private institutions and align 
	training with the demands of the 
	economy.



2. 	Understanding Labour's challenges: 
	Promote labour studies in Ghana by 
	expanding and resourcing the existing 
	Labour College in Accra to 
	international standards for both 
	Ghanaian and foreign students.



CHAPTER VII

Benchmarking Productivity and Productivity Revolution



We will work with the Management 
Development and Productivity Institute 
(MDPI) to develop economy-wide indicators 
for productivity that will serve as the 
benchmark for determining wages and 
addressing the concerns of both labour and 
management. The CPP will restructure the 
MDPI as the centre piece of a national 
productivity revolution. To ensure that this 
productivity revolution is broad-based and 
successful, we shall solicit the opinions of 
the public on various socio-economic 
problems and how they believe we can 
solve them at the least cost possible.



CHAPTER VIII

Housing Policy



Affordable housing for owners and renters 
is one of the most important aspects of a 
responsive social policy.



The CPP promises to:


1. 	Work with the Building and Road 
	Research Institute, the Ghana Real 
	Estate Developers Association (GREDA) 
	and other stakeholders in the housing 
	industry to provide low-cost 
	technologies for building high-quality 
	and high-capacity homes and 
	apartments across the country.



2. 	Promote the development of the 
	mortgage industry to increase the rate 
	of home ownership in the country.



3. 	Strengthen the role of the State 
	Housing Corporation (SHC) in the 
	provision of affordable housing 
	throughout the country, including in 
	rural areas.



4. 	Work with the Ghana Institution 
	of 

Engineers and other relevant private 
	and public bodies to improve 
	standards and quality in the 
	engineering and construction 
	industry.



5. 	Remove tax holidays for the high-end 
	housing market and provide tax 
	incentives for mass occupancy 
	affordable housing for workers.



6. 	The CPP will pass the reviewed rent 
	control Act immediately we assume 
	office whereby no tenant will have to 
	pay more than six month rent to 
	landlords.



7. 	The CPP will restore social housing as 
	a responsibility of government and 
	will bring back projects like Kaneshie 
	estate, Efiakuma estates etc.



CHAPTER IX

Cultural Policy



For years, successive governments have 
paid lip service to the development of a 
national cultural policy with the result that 
we have no policy framework to guide the 
preservation and promotion of our culture 
beyond annual festivals.


The CPP will use culture as another arsenal 
to defeat tribalism and build a united 
country. An annual festival will be instituted 
that will enable all regions to display their 
rich cultures. The timing will be geared 
towards attracting tourists.


We shall build open theatres in all district 
capital to facilitate the staging of concerts 
and dramas. The state will earmark funds 
for such creative arts especially for plays 
that portray our culture, our history and our 
heroes so as to encourage patriotism and 
national unity.



The Ministry of Arts and Culture will be 
tasked to set up and fund a team of 
professional musicians and song writers to 
write and produce music and songs of 
patriotic themes and that will highlight our 
national values on commercially 
competitive basis. This will also serve as a 
means of reducing the use of indecent 
lyrics.



CPP Policy initiatives will include the 
following:



1. 	Promote healthy lifestyles (under our 
	health and nutritional security policies).



2. 	Foster a spirit of volunteerism by 
	requiring all students to undertake 
	volunteer work in their communities as 
	part of their education.



3. 	Encourage Ghanaians to celebrate the 
	virtues of the family, particularly the 
	importance of parental responsibility at 
	all stages of a child's life, through 
	various initiatives.



4. 	Teach the virtues of peaceful co-
	existence and the importance of 
	resolving our difference through non-
	violence.



5. 	Aggressively discourage and eliminate 
	harmful cultural practices, especially 
	those against women and children.



6. 	Promote Ghanaian and African 
	literature, including plays.



7. 	Promote and improve the quality of the 
	performing and visual arts.


CHAPTER X
 
Sports Policy





The CPP looks beyond the entertainment 
value of sports and considers sports as 
important factors in promoting good 
health, fostering a spirit of 
competitiveness, and celebrating 
excellence at home and abroad.


We shall encourage every community to 
have locations where they can enjoy actively 
participating in sports that require very little 
investment but offer mass participation.


Active participation in sports should develop 
healthy culture, enhance a sense of 
community and reduce the incidence of 
ailments arising from lack of physical 
activity.



1. 	Football: To address the current 
	problem of excessive focus on football 
	at the expense of other sports, we shall 
	consider putting professional 
	and amateur football under separate 
	administrative autonomous bodies.



2. 	Non-football sports: All non-football 
	sports will remain under the Ministry of 
	Sports to ensure that they get 
	the attention that has been denied them 
	for years.



3. 	Provide sporting facilities at the district 
	and national levels to facilitate the 
	development of both amateur and 
	professional sports. Relevant laws will 
	be enacted to ensure that any such 
	infrastructure is provided as an integral 
	part of socio-economic development.



4. 	Sports Studies ­ Set up a tertiary 
	institution of international standing for 	
	the study and teaching of sports and 
	specialised sports medicine.




CHAPTER XI

Media and Society



Within the context of the 1992 constitution, 
we pledge to uphold all the freedoms 
granted to the media in this country. But we 
also realise that with freedoms must come 
responsibilities and the assurance that 
media work conforms to the values of the 
society. In this regard, we shall do the 
following, among others:



1. 	Raising broadcast standards: Create a 
	Broadcast Standards Board (BSB) to 
	ensure that the nation's airwaves are 
	free of images and messages that 
	undermine our social and moral values, 
	such as the glorification of violence 
	and the degradation of women in 
	movies and music.



2. 	We will revamp the Ghana News 
	Agency as part of government's 
	comprehensive communication 
	practice for harnessing information 
	about the government and state for 
	building a viable, united and cohesive 
	nation-state.



3. 	Advertising in Ghana: 
· 	Outlaw the use of foreign-made 
	commercials on Ghanaian airwaves as a 
	way to help local media houses build 
	their capacity and create employment 
	while promoting a Ghanaian view of 
	social and economic reality. 

.	Regulate the quality of advertisements 
	to strike a balance between commercial 
	interests and social values.



4. 	Building media capacity: Work with 
	various professional organizations to 
	help raise the quality of media practice 
	in Ghana to world standards.



CHAPTER XII

Combating Violent Crime





The recent increase in violent crime around 
the country has resulted in loss of many 
lives and loss of property.



The CPP government will:



1. 	Take an "out of the box" approach to 
	building the mobility of the Police 
	during our first two years in office by 
	purchasing 2,000 motor bikes to ensure 
	that uniformed and hidden patrols can 
	reach every part of the country.



2. 	Provide the Police with resources 
	including walkie-talkies, vehicles, 
	intelligence gathering logistics, and 
	other material incentives to fight crime 
	in general and violent crime in 
	particular.



3. 	Resource the Judiciary to expedite the 
	dispensation of justice, and strengthen 
	existing laws to make penalties for 
	violent crime stiffer.



4. 	Launch public education on the social 
	costs of crime and encourage the public 
	through various rewards to help the 
	Police, such as reporting illegal 
	manufacturers or sellers of firearms.



5. 	Reform the prison system to equip 
	inmates with employable skills and thus 
	reduce the incidence of repeat crime by 
	ex-prisoners.



6. 	Create more employment 
	opportunities nation-wide, raise 
	incomes and help reduce the kind of 
	social inequities that create the 
	conditions for all kinds of crimes.



CHAPTER XIII

Confronting the Narcotics Menace



The CPP's first act would be to rid the 
security and related agencies of corrupt 
officials, implement existing 
recommendations for reforms, and then 
launch an anti-narcotics policy that 
encompasses Interception, Prosecution, 
Treatment, and Education.



1. 	Interception: Resource the Narcotics 
	Control Board and other agencies to 
	improve intelligence and interception 
	as well as collaborate with international 
	organizations to stem the flow of drugs.



2. 	Prosecution: Resource the Police, 
	Judiciary and other state agencies to 
	prosecute and punish drug-related 	
	offenders, particularly traffickers. Re-
	introduce stricter laws on the seizure of 
	properties acquired from drug 
	proceeds directly or indirectly.



3. 	Treatment: Resource existing 
	institutions and create new ones, if 
	necessary, to provide treatment for 
	drug abusers, particularly the youth. 
	We shall encourage civil society 
	organisations to do the same.



4. 	Public Education: Introduce drug-
	abuse education in schools as well as 
	launch a national public awareness 
	programme on radio, TV and other 
	media on the harmful effects of drug 
	abuse on individuals, families and 
	society.



CHAPTER XIV

Empowering Women


The CPP's record on combatting political 
exclusion of women has not been matched 
by any political party in our history. We 
pledge to continue this tradition of ensuring




political space for all women in the struggle
to liberate the country from poverty. 
Our agenda for gender equity will, 
therefore, be pursued on these fronts:



1. 	Tackle aggressively the root causes of 
	discrimination against women from 
	childhood (inter-generational gender 
	discrimination).



2. 	Use affirmative action policies to 
	address current discrimination against 
	women in all spheres of national life.



3. 	Uphold the United Nations Commission 
	on the Status of Women (CSW) 2030 
	Agenda officially known as 
	"Transforming our world: the 2030 
	Agenda for Sustainable Development."





4. 	Create a conducive environment for 
	gender-responsive implementation of 
	the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
	Development through passing and 
	implementing enabling laws and 
	policies, building solid institutional 
	infrastructure, providing financial 
	resources, strengthening participation 
	mechanisms, and investing in sex-
	disaggregated data to guide national 
	action.



5. 	Intensify efforts to remove 
	discrimina on against girls, and by 
	extension women, at all levels of the 
	educational system through increasing 
	resources to the relevant public and 
	non-public institutions.



6. 	Declare the growing incidence of 
	teenage pregnancy, especially 
	statutory rape against young girls, 
	many of them still in basic school, as a 
	national epidemic and set up a task 
	force to investigate the causes and 
	propose lasting solutions.



7. 	Enforce the Affirmative Action Policy 
	to deal with current discrimination 
	against women in various aspects of 
	national life.




CHAPTER XV 

Protecting our Children



The Ghanaian child remains vulnerable as 
indicated by the high infant and child 
mortality rates, the half-a-million children 
who are still out of school despite the 
introduction of the capitation grant, and the 
thousands more who continue to be 
trafficked across the country to work as 
slaves.


The CPP, in honouring the United Nation's 
Convention on the Child as well as various 
national laws, such as the Children's Act of 
1998, the Juvenile Justice Act of 2003, and 
the Human Trafficking Act of 2005 will 
consolidate all programmes, including The 
Child Cannot Wait action programme, that 
are designed to improve the welfare of the 
Ghanaian child and ensure that they are 
implemented fully.



Among specific actions to be taken to 
protect the Ghanaian child are:



1. 	Family Hours on Television to ensure 
	that adult programmes that can corrupt 
	the morals of children are shown only 
	late at night.



2. 	Introduce a Children's Budget to track 
	public resources devoted to the welfare 
	of the Ghanaian child, including 
	education and recreation.


CHAPTER XVI

Caring for the Aged



Article 37 (2) (b) of the 1992 Constitution 
enjoins government to take measures to 
protect various social groups, including the 
aged.


A CPP government will empower all relevant 
state institutions to ensure that all sectors, 
including civil society organisations, 
participate adequately in caring for the aged 
in Ghana. (Our agricultural policy deals with 
income security for farmers and fishermen 
in old age.)




CHAPTER XVII

Persons with Disability



Despite the passage of the Disability Act, 
2006 (Act 715), the disabled ­ PWDs ­ in 
Ghana continue to face serious 
discrimination and institutional 
impediments to their efforts to contribute 
to national development. Physical access to 
buildings, including government ones, 
remains limited.


The CPP will introduce a number of 
interventions that are designed to give 
full effect and impetus to the Disability Act. 
We will make sure that the Disability Act and 
the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities are fully implemented with 
the speed of light. We shall go further to 
ensure that the dignity of PWDs is protected 
and enhanced. We shall leave no stone 
unturned.



The CPP pledges to do the following:



1. 	Enhance and adequately fund the 
	National Council of Persons with 
	Disabilities.



2. 	Decentralise the activities of the 
	National Council of Persons with 
	Disabilities to improve access to and 
	quality of service at the local level.



3. 	Institute the right to free education: 
	PWDs will be given free education at 
	public institutions, and the required 
	resources, materials and facilities will 
	be given to ensure unhindered access 
	and facilitate their education.





4. 	District Assessment centres will be 
	established and/or properly resourced 
	to among other things ensure early 
	childhood detection of Disability. Under 
	the NHIS, health care for PWD's with 
	certain health conditions or illnesses 
	will be free.



5. 	All public employers would be 
	legislated to ensure that at least 5.0 
	per cent of their workforce are PWDs. 
	Private Employers' will be given tax 
	incentives for employing PWDs as 5.0 
	per cent of their workforce. National 
	Employment Centres will also have 
	special Disability desks.



6. 	The CPP will increase the disability 
	common fund allocation to 5%, 
	and ensure its timely payment into 
	separate accounts for this purpose.



7. 	Establish community-based 
	rehabilitation and employment support 
	centres for the disabled as a means of 
	enhancing their skill and capacity.



8. 	Transportation shall be made 
	progressively free for PWD's.



9. 	The CPP will ensure that PWD's in 
	need of personal assistants will be 
	provided them free.



10. 	Parents of children with Disabilities 
	will be provided with both legal and 
	economic support.



11. 	Women with Disabilities will be given 
	special attention due to their 
	additional challenges as women and 
	as women with disability.



CHAPTER XVIII

Developing our Youth



The CPP values the youth because they are 
the ones who will run this country when the 
current generation of leaders retire and 
pass on.



Our youth development strategy thus is 
both comprehensive and forward-looking, 
as outlined below:



1. 	Create opportuni es for young people 
	to channel their youthful energies into 
	creative and socially desirable ends by 
	requiring every district to provide 
	Youth Activities Centres (YACs). These 
	centres will contain facilities for sports, 
	ICT centres, libraries, and counselling 
	services that are designed to prevent 
	the youth from falling victim to socially 
	harmful activities such as drug abuse, 
	alcoholism, and pre-marital sex, all of 
	which have been on the rise in recent times.



2. 	Launch the State of the Youth Report 
	to serve as a guide for implementation 
	of youth development programmes. 
	The report will be produced every two 
	years with the active participation of 
	the youth and other stakeholders.



3. 	Other youth development initiatives 
	are embedded in our social policies 
	such as education, sports, and human 
	resource development.


CHAPTER XIX

Bridging the North-South Divide



A CPP government will launch a special 
development agenda under the Office of 
the President to put forward time-bound 
strategies and initiatives for 
creating employment and other economic 
opportunities in the north in line with





ECONIMIC [sic] POLICIES



Taking economic growth and development 
as our central task is vital to invigorating our 
nation and is the fundamental requirement 
for lasting stability of the nation.


First, we take public ownership as the 
foundation of our economic philosophy. It is 
the basic force of the state that is used to 
guide and promote economic and social 
development. It is also a major guarantor 
for realizing the fundamental interests and 
the common prosperity of the majority of 
the people.


The state sector will be strengthened by the 
consolidation of state enterprises into large 
industrial champions with the goal of 
consolidating effort and creating 
internationally competitive national 
industries.


The state will focus on the 'commanding 
heights' of the economy with a growing 
private sector working in partnership with 
the state to industrialise.


The country will create the right regulatory 
framework that will promote inclusive 
growth beneficial to the majority of our 
citizens.


The CPP identifies under-production and 
unemployment as the greatest 
impediments to economic prosperity. 
Inflation is the cause as well as the effect of 
economic under performance. 
Unlike the NDC and NPP that see nothing 
wrong with the development of an aid 
dependent economy, the CPP from the 
perspective of our Nkrumaist philosophy of 
self-determination is committed to 
achieving economic independence:


An economy that is led by the state in 
partnership with the private sector for the


benefit of the broad masses of workers, 
students and the ordinary individual on the 
street.


An economy that is internally sustainable, an 
economy that will provide full employment, 
develop our human capabilities and the 
productive resources of our nation to 
transform our society.


This will be the fulfilment of our 
responsibility to achieve political and 
economic freedom so as to regain our 
dignity and self-respect and mitigate 
impoverishment that the NDC and the NPP 
have imposed on our economic and social 
development.


Our priority is to restore macroeconomic 
stability and to generate inclusive growth. 
This means making further efforts toward 
fiscal adjustment by taking concerted action 
at fiscal consolidation that is tilted towards 
supporting local industry and exports in 
order to balance our external trade.


We will seek to control inflation through 
pragmatic monetary and fiscal policies 
which will lead to a reduction in interest 
rates catalysing the private sector producing 
consequential growth and jobs.


We will invest intelligently in new factories 
that will substitute for imports and provide 
competitive products for our exports.


We will invest in cocoa plantations and value 
addition. These plantations will serve as 
model farms and will showcase best practice 
for other farmers. We will also invest heavily 
in tropical almond, bamboo, sheanuts, 
mango and cashew plantations to form the 
foundation of our agro industry for export



markets and to reduce dependency on 
cocoa.


These structural reforms will be necessary 
for improving the resilience of the economy 
particularly its ability to withstand shocks. 
The shortfalls in electricity supply that have 
led to what is popularly called 'dumsor' in 
the last few years has damaged the private 
sector extensively. We will resolve this 
condition by encouraging and supporting 
value for money investments in generation, 
transmission and distribution.


Unlike the NDC and NPP governments we 
will meet our financial obligations to the 
public energy institutions to help them 
deliver on their mandate. 
In order to manage the economy well, the 
CPP will do the following:



CHAPTER XX

National Development Planning



We will support the National Development 
Planning Commission (NDPC) to ensure 
effective national development planning. 
To this end, the CPP has been supportive of 
the 40-year development plan.



CHAPTER XXI

Macroeconomic Policies



We will take whatever measures that are 
necessary to maintain macroeconomic 
stability by:



CHAPTER XXII

Monetary Policy:



We will work with the Bank of Ghana (BoG) 
to strengthen Ghana's monetary policy and 
to continue reforms in the banking and 
financial sector, including improved 
oversight of banking and financial 
institutions and the passage and 
implementation of laws to protect the 
welfare of consumer.



1. 	Lowering Interest rates: We shall 
work with the BoG to induce our banks to 
bring down interest rates to reasonable and 
realistic levels for businesses, entrepreneurs 
and workers in both the formal and 
informal sectors. Lower interest rates will 
also make available long term funds for 
investment.



2. 	Mobilizing Private Sector 
financing: We will encourage the BoG to 
implement a new regulation that caps the 
percentage of Government assets held on 
the banking sectors balance sheet and turn 
that capital towards financing the private 
sector.



3. 	State-owned 
banks/development banks: We will review 
the mandate of the state-owned banks to 
ensure that wehave development banks 
again. We shall reform state-owned banks, 
including by listing them on the Ghana 
Stock Exchange, to deepen their capacity to 
finance national development and make 
them internationally competive. 
Where possible, we shall encourage them to 
venture into foreign markets, just as foreign 
banks are venturing into the Ghanaian 
banking sector.



4. 	Rural banks: We shall work with 
the central bank to strengthen the capacity 
of rural banks to finance rural agricultural 
and non-agricultural activities. Among other 
things, this calls for increased governance 
and transparency in the management and 
supervision of rural banks.




CHAPTER XXIII

Fiscal Policy:



Fiscal policy involves taxation, spending of 
the revenue from taxation, and 
management of the public debt.





The CPP will institute a programme to 
improve the overall public 
financial management of government 
revenue from all sources. It is important 
that we manage both oil and non-oil 
revenue efficiently and transparently to 
create public confidence in the managers of 
the economy.



1. 	An efficient and equitable tax 
regime: Despite many years of reform, the 
tax system in Ghana remains susceptible to 
abuse, especially by large companies which 
evade taxes through many means. This 
situation is compounded by big tax 
concessions often given to foreign investors 
without similar concessions to Ghanaian 
businesses. All these practices deprive the 
state of billions of Ghana Cedis every year, 
more than what we receive in foreign aid. 
By plugging these loopholes, we can reduce 
our dependence on donors while we 
improve our ability to finance our 
development and grow our economy.



2. 	Improving public expenditure. 
Hard as it is to believe, nobody knows 
exactly how many people are on 
government's payroll at any given time. 
The result has been massive waste and the in 
public expenditure. An estimated 25 per 
cent of salary expenditures and 50 per 
cent of non-salary expenditures in the 
education sector alone do not reach their 
intended beneficiaries. The CPP will first 
undertake a comprehensive census of the 
public sector and introduce systems and 
benchmarks to deal with this problem. 
The National Identification System which we 
intend to implement will be greatly helpful 
in this regard.



3. 	Managing petroleum revenue:


CPP will review and/or repeal the 
petroleum bill that adopts the royalty tax 
system (Re-shaped into what is called the 
Ghana hybrid system) as the mechanism 
for benefitting from her our oil resources.


Instead, CPP shall adopt the Production 
Sharing Formula for the distribution of oil 
revenues and benefits. If Ghana had 
adopted this formula for the recent oil 
find, she would have earned over US $9 
billion from her oil resources between 
2010/2015, representing 60% of total 
production revenue of over US $15 
billion.


Compare this to the paltry US $3 billion 
earned over the same period (under the 
royalty tax system) representing 19.4% of 
total production revenue. We will manage 
the revenue from Ghana's petroleum sector 
strictly in accordance with the Petroleum 
Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815).



4. 	Debt policy and management: 
Our debt policy will be driven by our 
development needs and our capacity to 
repay through high economic growth and 
improved tax administra on. Our debt 
policy will not be driven by donor 
benchmarks that ignore our development 
needs and undermine our ability to finance 
our development. We shall also improve 
our capacity for debt analysis and 
management, a deficiency which impedes 
our ability to raise funds both locally and 
externally to finance our development.



5. 	Transparency and 
Accountability: We shall require timely and 
consistent monthly and quarterly 
publication of public finances by national 
and local government tax agencies.




CHAPTER XXIV

Exchange Rate Policy:



A CPP government will encourage and 
collaborate with the BoG to keep the value 
of the Cedi relatively stable by ensuring 
good balance of payment performance and 
intervening in the foreign exchange market 
when necessary.



CHAPTER XXV

Agricultural and Rural Transformation Policies


The NDC government's attitude towards 
agriculture has been one of neglect which 
has resulted in continuing decline.


The CPP's agricultural policy will focus on 
attaining food security and nutrition for the 
nation, income security for farmers and 
fishermen, and self-sufficiency in industrial 
sectors that depend on forest and 
agricultural products for their work.


The emphasis will be on the use of science 
and bio-technology to mechanize and 
modernize agriculture. We will of course 
have nothing to do with GMO's. 
Specific policy initiatives will include the 
following:



CHAPTER XXVI

Food, Fisheries and Livestock Sub-Sectors



The main goals shall be to:


1. Facilitate easy acquisition and 
utilization of land for agricultural 
purposes, including fish farming and 
ranching.



2. It has been observed that with cheap 
almond nut cake protein, we could 
transform the entire Volta lake area 
into the largest fish pond in the world.



3. We shall set up the first tropical 
almond research institute with the 
view of advancing research in this 
area which has beneficial forward and 
backward linkages.



4. Increase state resource allocation, such 
as subsidised inputs, technical 
assistance and price support to farmers 
and fishermen, etc.



5. Increase support for the Extension 
Service to provide services for the 
farmers.



6. Increase resources to various 
agricultural colleges and research 
institutes, such as the Food Research 
Institute the Crop Research Institute 
and Soil Research Institute to enhance 
their support activities for the sector.



7. Encourage and resource the University 
of Development Studies (UDS) to 
expand specialist studies of rural 
economies and societies in order to 
shape public policy.



8. Expand agricultural insurance schemes 
as part of basic broad programme to 
improve farmers' access to credit.



9. Establish a Co-operative Investment 
Bank. Development agencies and local 
authorities will be empowered to 
support and to help establish co-
operatives.



10. Restructure the agricultural sector to 
include a Food Distribution Board and 
Agricultural Marketing Agency. 
The Ministry of Food and Agriculture 
(MoFA) will continue to support 
production through extension and 
technical services.



11. Support the development and 
strengthening of Farmer-Based 
Organisations (FBOs) as well as 
cooperatives to give farmers easy 
access to affordable credit and offer 
them other forms of capacity-building 
assistance, such as subsidised literacy


and numeracy classes as well as basic 
business management skills.



12. Develop, in collabora on with farmers, 
agricultural infrastructure, such as 
irrigation systems; fish preservation 
and processing facilities; silos; as well 
as standard infrastructure like 
electricity, telephones, water, roads, 
and affordable housing.



13. Develop a National Nutrition Policy 
based on common foodstuffs in Ghana 
as a way of promoting healthy lifestyles 
while raising the incomes of our 
farmers and fishermen. The Food 
Research Institute will be tasked to 
improve food preparation methods to 
make preparation of Ghanaian cuisine 
less time-consuming.



14. Develop a Farmers and Fishermen 
Income Security Scheme (FFISSH) to 
protect them against old age poverty, 
especially in the rural and coastal 
areas.



15. Adopt a fisheries policy to guide the 
development of sector.



16. Increase the production of corn, soya-
bean, ground nuts, millet and 
sorghum to substitute for hops barley 
and wheat in beer, flour, edible oil 
and poultry production. There is a 
potential savings of about $600m in 
imports.



17. Promote the production of roots and 
tubers to compete with the 
consumption of imported rice in the 
food sector.



18. Increase the cultivation of industrial 
sugar cane for the production of 
sugar, biofuel and food grade 
ethanol. Current import expenditure 
on this item, which exceeds $200m, 
will be retained in the domestic 
economy for the benefit of our 
farmers.



19. We shall encourage the growing of 
bast-fibre to produce jute sacks 
saving 300 million dollars otherwise 
paid other countries.



CHAPTER XXVII

Cocoa Sub-Sector


We shall intensify cocoa produc on and 
processing to meet current global supply 
deficits.


We shall undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of the entire value chain in the 
cocoa sector, including production, 
purchasing, quality control, transportation, 
shipping and administration, to guarantee 
the continued viability of the sector and 
ensure that all stakeholders in the sector, 
especially farmers, get their fair share of 
returns from the production and sale of 
cocoa and its products.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Forestry and Tree Crops Sub-Sectors:




We shall intensify current programmes such 
as replanting (and the provision of 
alternative income sources such as livestock 
breeding to rural dwellers) to preserve our 
forests. To this end, we will introduce a 
nation-wide tree planting exercise notably 
almond trees with the view of safeguarding 
the environment and preventing the 
adverse effect of climate change. Through 
this, we shall create employment, provide 
alternative energy sources, and raise the 
incomes for a large section of the 
population, especially the youth, in a 
relatively short period. The Forest Products 
Research Institute will be funded to enable 
the establishment of a pulp and paper 
industry using local raw materials to satisfy 
the country's pulp and paper needs and for 
export.





We will also intensify the cultivation of 
almond, bamboo, cashew, sheanuts and 
coffee to diversify our agricultural export 
commodity sector.



CHAPTER XXIX

Agro-processing

Value addition to primary produce like 
cashew, sheanuts, coconut, oranges, 
pineapples, and other fruits will be 
aggressively promoted by ensuring that 
existing and new manufacturing firms 
develop relationships with out-growers that 
give them steady supply of raw materials 
for their firms.


The Industrial Research Institute and Food 
Research Institute will be adequately 
funded to undertake research up to the 
pilot plant scale to 
(i) replace the use of 
imported barley malt and malt adjuncts 
such as flaked rice, oats and corn with 
locally produced sorghum and corn,
(ii) 
produce corn/cassava syrup for our soft 
drink companies, and 
(iii) produce 
pharmaceutical grade starch.



CHAPTER XXX

Rural Transformation



Rather than viewing the rural areas as a 
permanent source of cheap labour for the 
cities, we shall guide the transformation of 
those areas from deprived communities to 
well-developed ones by providing them 
with a wide array of infrastructure, such as 
modern roads, electricity, irrigation 
systems, and medical facilities, to facilitate 
both agricultural and non-agricultural 
activities.


Rural enterprises will be encouraged with 
increased government assistance for the 
Rural Enterprises Project (REP) and similar 
projects. The REP has proven to be an 
effective project for promoting local 
economic development (LED).


Factories for making door and floor mats, 
bamboo factories to manufacture bamboo 
cups, trays, furniture and other products, 
rattan factories and wood factories will be 
encouraged. This strategy will stem the 
current flow of rural-to-urban migration 
and lead to balanced development of the country.



CHAPTER XXXI

Industrial Policies



Our industrial policies will embrace all 
productive activities for the effective 
growth and development of the economy. 
We must rebuild our industrial strength 
and we can do so under a CPP Government 
working together with local experts and 
indigenous players, to plan Ghana's 
industrial development.


Our aim is not just to save Ghanaian owned 
companies and factories from closing down, 
but to create new companies and new 
technology-based industries using, where 
necessary, new public enterprises as 
catalysts.


We will develop regional industrial 
development plans for every region 
through the establishment of 
development agencies in conjunction with 
local authorities in line with the national 
development plan. Their role will be to 
identify opportunities for labour intensive 
industrial production and crafts with 
potential for export and help establish 
them. The new development agencies as well as 
the potential factories and crafts 
will be resources for investment.


Among our initiatives to pursue our 
industrial policies will be:





1. Industrial competitiveness: Improve 
domestic and international 
competitiveness of Ghanaian industry 
through benchmarks to be jointly 
developed by industry and 
government.



2. High-value industrial employment: In 
the short-term, this will entail a focus 
on industrial activities that depend on 
local raw materials and are labour 
intensive.



3. Incentives from the state: Provide 
incentives to industry, such as 
discriminatory pricing for electricity as 
well as land reforms, to ensure easy 
acquisition and development of land 
for business.



4. Industrial capacity: Assemble experts 
to initiate the building of a machine 
tools industry for Ghana in the 
shortest time possible, along with the 
revival of strategic factories, both of 
which are critical to a modern 
industrial economy.



5. Agriculture/Manufacturing Guest 
Worker Program: The CPP will 
promote a program that can enhance 
the skill capacity of Ghanaian workers 
through an EU/AU Guest Worker 
framework that could be established. 
This will enable technology 
transfer/best practice 
managerial/operational and 
governance skills to be acquired as well 
as stem the tide of illegal migration and 
will have significant socio-economic 
benefits.



6. On assumption of office CPP will 
abrogate any EPA signed unilaterally 
with EU.



CHAPTER XXXII

Private Sector Development and Partnership:



Our private sector development policy is 
founded on our concept of the 
development of the productive resources of 
the country to satisfy domestic demand and 
export in order to achieve an internally 
sustained and balanced growth, full 
employment and prosperity. It will generally 
reconstruct the colonial economy that has 
been inflicted on us. This development 
approach will be part of our 
industrialisation effort and will be 
undertaken in partnership with the private 
sector.



The objects of our policy will be:



A. The encouragement of the formation
 
of identifiable cooperatives and 
marketing associations in primary 
production to which will be extended 
research and production technology, 
improved management techniques, 
marketing access, credit and a price 
support mechanisms to sustain and 
increase production.



B. The delivery of public goods and 
services such as research, land 
acquisition and water resource 
development that in totality will 
nurture and facilitate the 
development of big private sector 
firms that invest in and operate 
processing plants and provide support 
for large and small holders in 
primary production.



1. We will intervene in the market to lend 
a hand and stimulate the private sector 
to secure the strategic investments 
that are our development imperatives.



2. We shall go beyond the creation of an 
enabling environment for private 
sector development. Indeed our goal is




the development of the capacity and 
capability of the private sector for 
international partnerships and 
participation in global economic and 
trade competition.



3. We will develop food and raw material 
agriculture for the production of 
import substitutes in our food 
processing and beverage 
manufacturing sectors.



4. We will develop our brick and tile 
industry to produce building 
construction material and reduce the 
level of clinker imports.



This private sector development and 
partnership strategy will reduce our 
dependency on imports, reduce our trade 
deficit, stabilise our currency and lower the 
inflation rate. It will also expand the 
formal sector and widen tax net to increase 
revenue.


We acknowledge the challenges that will be 
faced in the implementation of this private 
sector development and partnership 
strategy. Among these are informal 
structure and low level of technological and 
managerial capability of much of the private 
sector.



CHAPTER XXXIII

Mining and Quarrying Policy

A CPP government will address the 
following major issues:



A. Galamsey 
The CPP is very concerned about the rate at 
which illegal small scale mining, popularly 
known as 'galamsey', is polluting and 
destroying our lands and water bodies.


To arrest this problem a CPP government 
will promptly resource and direct the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to 
work with the MMDAs and the Police to 
enforce environmental practices and 
standards in areas in which 'galamsey' 
activities are ongoing.


The CPP recognizes that 'galamsey' is 
providing employment and income to 
hundreds of thousands of Ghanaians, 
particularly young people, the 
overwhelming majority of whom don't 
have alternative sources of employment 
and income. Therefore, the CPP will 
promptly institute a programme to 
regularise and modernise 'galamsey' 
operations. The programme will also 
extend credit and provide plant pools of 
tools, equipment and machinery to 
operators, the services being provided 
currently predominantly by foreigners.



B. 	Enforcement of Immigration and 
Labour Laws:


Furthermore, in the mining industry, the 
CPP will ensure the enforcement of our 
immigration and labour laws by big mining 
firms. These firms will also be encouraged 
to practice equity by improving the 
remuneration of Ghanaians so that what 
they earn is comparable to what expatriates 
of similar training and experience earn.



C. Ending use of Child Labour:


A big concern in both 'galamsey' and the 
quarrying sub-sector is the use of child 
labour. We will end this practice by 
increasing the inspection of 'galamsey' 
operations and quarries and enrolling 
workers who are children of school going 
age in schools.



CHAPTER XXXIV

Manufacturing Policy


Manufacturing is the backbone of a modern 
economy, and that's why the CPP 
government of Kwame Nkrumah set up 
many manufacturing factories at a time 
when the private sector was small and 
government intervention was needed, as 
was the practice all over the world.


The manufacturing sector has declined 
recently due to lack of support, 
unavailability and high cost of credit, and 
unreliability and high cost of utilities, 
particularly power.


A CPP government will support the 
manufacturing sector with targeted state 
assistance to Ghanaian businesses in the 
forms of development loans, tax incentives 
and rebates, import duty drawback and 
exemptions, as well as encourage the 
banking and financial sector to make credit 
available and, with the collabora on of the 
BoG, bring down lending rates. Moreover, 
we will institute a special power service and 
rate for the manufacturing sector in order 
to make service reliable so as not to disrupt 
manufacturing activity.

CHAPTER XXXV




Energy Policy


The ultimate objective of our energy policy 
is to ensure adequacy and security of 
supply at all times.



A. Developing an Oil and Gas 

Economy:


We shall introduce a strategic plan to 
carefully develop all sectors associated with 
the oil and gas industry. We shall 
concentrate on production, refining, and 
export as part of the development of a 
petro-chemical industry. We will develop 
the salt resources of Ghana to produce 
products needed for the development of 
the petro-chemical industry.


We will make Ghana the petroleum refining 
hub of the West Africa sub-region, with 
large-scale petroleum refining capacity 
providing the region's gasoline, jet/aviation 
fuel, diesel fuel and lubricating oils.


The CPP intends to develop nitrogen-based 
fertilizers and other industrial and domestic 
products so that Ghana can derive the 
maximum benefit from the oil and gas 
industry.


The CPP shall revamp and retool the Tema 
oil refinery to meet the best international 
standards and shall establish a second oil 
refinery in the country.



B. Developing Renewable Energy 

sources:


A CPP government will develop renewable 
sources like solar, wind, bio-mass and wave. 
We will support the Nzema solar project, 
which when completed is expected to be 
the biggest photovoltaic plant in Africa 
capable of lighting 100,000 homes. 
The success of this project will give us an insight 
into how solar energy can be harnessed to 
address our energy demands.


Under a CPP government Ghana will invest 
in a wind energy program wherever feasible 
with topography from which wind power 
can be generated. We shall install wind 
turbines to generate wind energy.


The CPP shall therefore take advantage of 
the 1000 km wind corridor from the North 
to Ada that lies along the Volta River. 
Wind turbines to be manufactured from 
fibre glass produced in a to be reactivated

 


Abosso glass factory shall be installed in 
this wind corridor to produce energy.


The development of bio-energy and 
biomass will receive equal attention. We 
shall take a close look at the land tenure 
system with the aim of freeing adequate 
arable land for the cultivation of crops, 
plants and wood-fuels for conversion into 
bio-fuels.

The ultimate aim of the CPP is to have at 
least 20 per cent of energy requirements 
from renewable sources. 
The policy will have the following focus:

The key elements of the CPP's energy policy 
will be as follows:


1. Electricity generation: We shall, 
subject to cost, technical feasibility and 
environmental considerations move 
towards a progressive energy mix of hydro, 
thermal, oil, gas, nuclear, wind, wave, solar 
and bio-mass for the generation of 
electricity for households and businesses.



2. Capacity building: We shall 
develop a modern and well-resourced 
energy planning system to ensure that we 
generate enough energy to keep pace with 
our economic and social needs. The Energy 
Commission, the Energy Foundation, 
Public Utilities Regulatory Commission, 
Petroleum Commission, civil society 
organisations, and the relevant government 
ministries and agencies will play an active 
role in the development of this system.



3. Energy security: We shall 
diversify the sources of energy production, 
as stated above. As we do that we shall 
diversify the location as well so as to 
minimise the risk of failure or disruptions in 
supply resulting from a disaster or a 
catastrophe in any part of the country.



4. Regulation and ownership: We 
shall pass relevant legislation, where 
needed, to govern the production, 
distribu on, and use of energy in the 
country. While we will welcome foreign 
investment in the generation and 
distribution of energy in Ghana, we shall 
ensure at all times that Ghana has strategic 
ownership to preserve our control over 
strategic national assets.



5. Local Content and Local 
Participation:
We shall ensure that the 
Petroleum Commission vigorously enforces 
the Petroleum (Local Content and Local 
Participation) Regulations (LI 2204) to 
increase Ghanaian content and 
participation in the petroleum sector.



6. Financing: We shall ensure that 
all our energy plans are accompanied with
 comprehensive and credible financing 
schemes that will enable them to be 
implemented and managed efficiently.



7. Access and affordability: We will 
structure the production and distribution of 
energy to ensure reliable access for 
households and businesses at rates that are 
affordable and internationally competitive.



8. Management: We will improve 
the management of utilities by setting 
efficiency benchmarks and requiring utility 
companies to publish financial and 
management reports periodically.



9. Conservation: We will use 
legislation, public education, transportation 
policy, and fiscal policy to promote efficient 
use by households, government, and 
businesses of the energy that we produce 
and distribute.





CHAPTER XXXVI

Construction Policy



The main thrust of our policy in the 
construction sector will be to ensure that 
artisanal, craft, architectural, engineering 
and construction standards are set, are 
adhered to, are monitored and supervised, 
and sanctions and penalties are applied 
when standards aren't adhered to. 
To these ends the CPP will:



1. Revive the craft and artisanal 
apprenticeship and training system by 
identifying and resourcing master 
craftsmen.



2. Increase resources to technical schools, 
institutes and polytechnics (that are 
being turned into technical 
universities).



3. Increase resources to the supervisory 
training and certification institutions, 
the National Vocational Training 
Institute (NVTI) and the Council for 
Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training (COTVET).



4. Increase resources to the monitoring 
and supervisory departments of the 
Ministry of Water Resources, Works 
and Housing (MWRWH), and of the 
Architectural and Engineering Services 
Limited (AESL).



5. Ensure that the MWRWH and AESL 
collaborate with professional bodies 
such as the Ghana Institution of 
Engineers as well as associations such 
as the Association of Building and Civil 
Engineering Contractors of Ghana 
(ABCECG) to set, implement, supervise 
and monitor standards.



6. Implement vigorously the Engineering 
Act through the bodies listed above 
and other relevant ones, and by 
providing partial funding for the 
establishment and operation of a 
secretariat.



CHAPTER XXXVII

Service Sector Policies



The CPP's long-term objective for the sector 
is to create high-value-added jobs in the 
following sub-sectors:



A. 	ICT for local and foreign markets. 
This will facilitate the growth of the 
industrial sector while providing an 
opportunity for Ghanaian firms to gain a 
foothold in the global economy.



B. Real estate and professional 
(architectural and engineering) for local 
and foreign markets. While the domestic 
component of these services will improve 
the quality of infrastructure development, 
the foreign component will yield possibly 
billions of dollars in foreign exchange.



C. Educational and health for local 
and foreign markets through increased 
enrolment of foreign students in our 
institutions of higher education, and world 
class medical services for clients in the sub-
region and beyond. Both will yield foreign 
exchange while spurring us to maintain our 
educational and medical facilities at 
international standards.



D. Tourism: We shall continue to 
develop the tourism industry to create jobs 
and generate income, while combatting the 
undesirable aspects of tourism, such as the 
sex trade and other social vices.



E. Hotels and restaurants 
(hospitality industry): We will work with 
stakeholders to make hotel rates 
internationally competitive and raise 
the quality of restaurant and other hospitality 
services to world class standards.





In the retail trading sub-sector that has 
been invaded illegally by foreigners, the 
CPP will enforce our laws so that the sub-
sector is reserved for Ghanaians as stated 
in our laws.


CHAPTER XXXVIII

Environment and Natural Resources



The CPP's policy on the environment will be 
based on a Clean and Green Strategy of 
meeting present social and economic needs 
without depriving future generations of the 
right to the same environment and 
resources. In pursing this strategy, we shall 
emphasise conservation at all levels of 
society. With respect to the environment, 
we shall do the following, among others:




CHAPTER XXXIX

Natural Environment



A. Aggressively enforce laws against 
deforestation.



B. Aggressively enforce noise pollution 
laws in cities and towns.



C. Keep the atmosphere clean and 
healthy by outlawing the open burning 
of garbage in communities and 
residential areas. This will help reduce 
the incidence of disease and thus 
reduce the national health bill.



D. Encourage community gardening and 
tree planting.



CHAPTER LX

The Built Environment


To ensure that Ghana has 21st century cities 
and towns, the CPP will do the following so 
that there is a more coherent and 
disciplined approach to development and 
the process of urbanisation.



A. Develop a comprehensive urban 
development policy.



B. Establish an Urban Development 
Institute to study trends and factors in 
urban development, such as water 
provision and sanitation management, 
and advise national and local 
governments accordingly. The Institute 
will share its facilities and services with 
sister African countries as part of our 
efforts to promote African and 
continental cooperation.



C. Rigorously enforce standards in 
engineering and construction to ensure 
quality and safety by implementing the 
Engineering Act and providing some 
funding for its secretariat.



CHAPTER XLI

Natural Resources



We shall spare no effort to ensure the 
efficient, equitable and sustainable use of 
our natural resources. The Navy, for 
example, will be enlisted to patrol our 
shores to combat illegal fishing by foreign 
trawlers. At the same me, when outside 
investors are required to exploit any of 
these resources, we shall insist upon the 
state owning a strategic share such as the 
10% in big mining firms, and we shall 
ensure that appropriate taxes are always 
paid to the state.



Waste Management: The CPP's policy on 
waste management will be multi-sectoral, 
involving the Ministries of Local 
Government and Rural Development, of 
Health, among others, and will focus on 
waste minimisa on initiatives that deal with 
industry and households, as well waste-as-
wealth initiatives that emphasise re-cycling. 
Where some of these initiatives are already 
in place, the CPP will accelerate and 
intensify them, in view of the waste 
management crisis currently facing the 
country.





CHAPTER XLII

Financing Development



A CPP government will:



A. Enhance the National Infrastructure 
Financing Authority (NIFA) to source funds 
through municipal, national, and 
international bonds and other means to 
finance capital projects, such as modern 
highways, under-ground and above-ground 
rail systems, ports, waterways, and other 
forms of public transport.



B. Reform our budgeting process and 
introduce Inter-generational financing, 
based on NIFA, to replace the present pay-
as-you-go system, which is non-sustainable 
and is responsible for the massive under-
investment in our development.



C. Promote public-private partnership 
(PPP) in infrastructure development, by 
giving financial institutions tax incentives 
to build schools and other facilities, which 
national and local governments will then 
lease over a specified period, after which 
they become public property.



D. Weed out waste in the public sector 
as part of the productivity revolution by 
introducing transparency in public 
expenditures by asking all ministries, 
departments and agencies to publish 
financial and management reports in the 
media every three months.



E. Increase revenue by cracking down 
on tax evaders, tackling corruption in tax 
administra on, and imposing stiff penalties.



F. Simplify tax paying procedures as part 
of Customer care so as to reduce the cost 
and inconvenience of compliance to



CHAPTER XLIII


Beyond Good Governance



The CPP will be a responsive government 
with policies and pro-poor innovations that 
respond to the needs of the people.



CHAPTER XLIV

Fighting Corruption



1. A CPP government will deal with

corruption holistically, from greater 
state transparency, accountability and 
merit-based human resource 
management in public administration to 
comprehensive institutional analysis to 
identify where remedies lie.



2. A CPP government will increase

resources to public institutions such as 
the Commission on Human Rights and 
Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), the 
Economic and Official Crimes Office 
(EOCO), Public Accounts Committee of 
Parliament, the National Procurement 
Agency, and the Auditor General. We 
shall create awareness of the Whistle 
Blower Law, which encourages the 
public to report corrupt practices as well 
as pass the Freedom of Information Bill 
as part of a broad legislative agenda to 
improve governance and fight 
corruption.



3. We will ensure strict implementation the

Procurement Act by making sure that 
thresholds are observed, that oversight 
is practiced and that sole sourcing is 
limited to true emergencies.



4. We will focus on institutional reforms

that will simplify government 
procedures and structures, reduce 
discretionary powers of certain officials, 
and use technology wherever applicable 
to address actions of officialdom that 
precipitate corruption.




5. We will neutralise political obstacles by

engaging civil society and the media 
through the provision of resources to 
help expose and denounce corruption 
and put pressure on the government.





6. The private sector will also be 
instrumental in the CPP's fight against 
corruption, by policing its own codes of
 conduct and sticking to high standards of 
governance.



7. International organisations and bilateral 

aid agencies will be encouraged to 
strengthen institutional capacity and 
ensure the transparency of the projects 
they support.



8. Swift and appropriate sanctions will be

imposed for breaches of laws and 
procurement rules and guidelines that 
are contained in the reports of the Public 
Accounts Committee, Finance 
Committee, and Auditor General.


In adopting the above corruption busting
strategies, we are mindful of implementation 
and political obstacles.


The fight against corrup on must therefore 
be integrated into governance and the 
development process. Within our 
government there will be no more cover-ups.


We will make provisions for reports from the 
Auditor General and other corruption 
prevention institutions to be published 
without hindrance and provide special 
resources for civic society organizations that 
demonstrate capacity to investigate 
corruption and have the courage to publish 
corrupt practices. 

The CPP shall speedily implement the 
National anti-corruption action plan 
(NACAP).



CHAPTER XLV

Devolution of Power and Increasing Social Accountability



Citizens have the right to make public 
servants accountable for public service 
delivery. To ensure that this happens 
routinely we propose to amend the 1992 
constitution to allow for popular election of 
all metropolitan, municipal and district chief 
executives (MMDCEs). This will be broader 
than the CRC's recommendation of popular 
election of only mayors of Metropolitan 
Areas and against the Government's position 
of selection by the Public Service 
Commission and then election by Assemblies. Getting all 
MMDCEs popularly elected will have, among 
others, the following benefits:



1. Make MMDCEs and other local officials 
directly responsible to address the 
needs of the communities they serve 
instead of working to please the 
appointing authorities in Accra.



2. Ensure that all MMDAs publish on a 
monthly basis the taxes they collect from 
lorry parks, markets, households and 
businesses in their MMDAs and how 
they spend those taxes.



3. Increase transparency on development 
of MMDAs and raise popular awareness 
of their development rights.



4. Give opportuni es to minorities, the 
marginalized and vulnerable groups to 
take part in governance.



CHAPTER XLVI

The Constitution Review Process



After years of agitation for amendment of 
certain provisions of the 1992 Constitution a 
Constitution Review Commission (CRC) was 
established in January 2010 and the CPP and 
its members a ended its public hearings to 
contribute views and some submitted 
memoranda.


The CRC completed its work and submitted its 
report in December 2011. But no action has
been taken on the implementation of the 
recommendations since October 2015 when



a law suit that challenged the 
constitutionality of the work of the CRC was 
decided in favour of the CRC by the Supreme 
Court.


The CPP wants the constitution review 
process to be completed by implementation 
of the recommendations of the CRC. 
Therefore, from the beginning to the end of 
next year, 2017, the CPP will implement the 
recommendations of the CRC contained in 
the Report of the Constitution Review 
Commission, taking into account the NDC 
government's White Paper on the Report of 
the Constitution Review Commission of 
Inquiry. The CRC's recommendations fall into 
two categories, those that require referenda 
for amendment because they are entrenched 
provisions in the 1992 Constitution, and 
those that don't require referenda and can be 
amended by the Parliament. Since those that 
require referenda need to be gazetted for six 
months before referenda are held, the CPP 
will begin the process early in 2017 so that 
the referenda can be held by the Electoral 
Commission before the end of the year. Also, 
the CPP will get the Parliament to pass those 
that don't require referenda throughout the 
year.



CHAPTER XLVII

Legislative Agenda



To improve governance by fighting corruption 
and devolve power, we shall review existing 
laws and expedite passage of others to 
facilitate the implementation of our 
development agenda. These include:



1. All recommendations of the CRC to 
amend the 1992 Constitution that 
Parliament can pass, i.e., which don't 
require referenda, will be passed in 
2017.



2. Repeal Petroleum law and other natural 
resources legislations which are not in 
the best interest of the country.



3. Enhance the capacity of government to 
perform its functions.



4. Enact any other laws that will enhance 
the quality of governance.



5. Overhaul the criminal justice system.




CHAPTER XLVIII

Referenda



Some recommendations of the CRC to amend 
the 1992 Constitution require referenda 
because they are "entrenched provisions". 
We will make Parliament take action on these 
early in 2017 so that they can be gazetted for 
six months and referenda can be held on 
them before the end of 2017. These include:



1. Electing all MMDCEs.



2. Abolishing the death penalty.



3. Compelling the president to pay taxes 
like the rest of Ghanaians (leadership 
by example)..



4. Separating the Minister of Justice from 
the Attorney General.



5. Separating the executive from the 
legislature, i.e., preventing 
parliamentarians from serving as 
ministers, which would reduce executive 
influence over the legislature.




CHAPTER XLIX

Role of Traditional Leaders



The CPP shall adhere to the provisions of the 
Constitution pertaining to the institution of 
chieftaincy by ensuring that it becomes a vital 
part of the new democratic culture of the 
country as well as play its part in national 
development.


A CPP government will encourage the review 
of outmoded chieftaincy practices which 
inhibit democratic expression and impede 
socio-economic development.



CHAPTER L

Public Sector Reforms and Innovation



We shall ensure that the public sector keeps 
pace with the latest technologies and 
practices to enable it to manage public 
resources well and respond effectively, 
efficiently and speedily to the needs of the 
public. To address the problems of the public 
sector, the CPP will do the following:



1. Within six months of coming into office, 
the CPP shall implement the national ID 
system utilising local so ware developers.



2. Immediately launch a public sector census to 
determine the exact size of the sector in order to 
resolve the age-old problem of "ghost names" and annual 
budget over-runs.



3. Incorporate innovation into public sector management to 
ensure that the sector keeps pace with scientific and 
technological developments.



4. Improve the sector's capacity for policy analysis, 
budgeting, and management to make it effective and efficient 
in the discharge of its duties.

5. Hold public sector officials 
accountable
through stronger supervision.



CHAPTER LI

National Security



Our defence policy is first and foremost to 
secure Ghana's sovereignty, unity and 
territorial integrity in all areas - land, sea and air. 
The CPP government:



A. Will take an "out of the box" approach to building
 Police Mobility during our first two years in office by 
equipping uniformed and hidden patrols that can reach every 
part of the country.



B. We will engage communities and 
encourage them to form leadership teams which 
as part of their remit will assist the security 
services in promoting peace and security within 
the communities.
This approach for effective crime 
management and citizen security will, combined with 
our proposals for economic growth and job creation, 
make Ghana a safer, more peaceful and more prosperous 
society. Furthermore, the CPP will expand the role of 
the security forces in na onal development 

by:



1. Resourcing the Ghana Immigration Service to perform its functions well.



2. Equipping the Ghana Police Service, 
improving the quality of their training, 
and passing laws to make them efficient and 
responsive at national and local levels.



3. Holding anyone, including Police officers 
and Port officials, criminally liable for auto 
accidents such as those caused by overloading 
that result from their negligence.



4. Introducing computerised ckecking system 
for traffic violations to facilitate efficient 
enforcement of our laws.



5. Maintaining a well-trained, well-equipped, 
and well-motivated Armed Forces.



6. Providing a national framework to formally 
engage the Armed Forces in the provision and 
maintenance of infrastructure of all kinds 
for public use ­ at home and abroad.



7. Enhancing the capabilities of specialist units 
in the Armed Forces to support industry and research.



8. Securing the participation of the Armed Forces in 

disaster prevention and management and in combatting 
threats such as terrorism and narco-trafficking.



9. Creating a disciplined citizenry and facilitating 
the mobilization of every capable adult in national 
emergencies by considering the institution of a 
compulsory one year national military service for all adults.



10. Ensuring peace and stability in Africa by working 
with the ECOWAS and the AU.



CHAPTER LII

Judicial Reforms



We also understand that 'justice delayed is justicce denied'. 
We will therefore:


A. Ensure effective resource alloca on into 
the judicial system to enhance efficiency and 
speed in its administration.


B. Ensure the total independence of the Judiciary


C. Uphold the rule of law.


D. Ensure transparency in the administration of justice.


E. Encourage Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) to ensure swift and equitable administration of justice.


F. Commit to the establishment of the Office of the Independent Prosecutor.


G. Promote education among the population on the rights and responsibilities of citizens.



CHAPTER LIII

Ghana and Globalisation



In the age of globalisation,
where labour, capital and production move across national 
borders with relative ease, often at the expense of poor 
countries like Ghana, it is important that we adopt 
policies that protect us against the harmful effects of 
globalisation while also taking advantage of its benefits. 
This we will do through the following:



CHAPTER LIV

Ghanaian Diaspora and Political Participation



The CPP will pass a law that would enable Ghanaians 
living abroad to have direct representation in 
Parliament by people that they would elect abroad 
at their own expense.



1. We envisage a representative each from Ghanaian 
associations from four geographic areas like the 
Americas, Europe, Asia, and Africa.



2. Each representative shall be given a full
vote in Parliament
 would enjoy the same privileges as other parliamentarians. 
This is a win-win proposi on that would give our sisters and 
brothers abroad the opportunity to raise issues of interest 
to them through their representatives in Ghana, and at the 
same time contribute to the development of the land of their birth.



CHAPTER LV

International Professionals Forum of Ghana 


The continued loss of Ghanaian professionals to the outside 
world remains a major challenge to our national development 
effort. Although there is always reverse migration as non-resident 
Ghanaians return home, on average more skilled Ghanaians leave than 
do return. We shall set up the International Professionals Forum of 
Ghana (IPFG) to foster cooperation between Ghanaian

41

professionals at 
home and abroad in areas such as education, health, economics and 
engineering as an important part of our human resource development 
and management agenda.



CHAPTER LVI

Relations with African Countries



Our relations with fellow

African countries will be a continuation of the leadership role 
Ghana played in the continent's independence in the 1950s and 1960s. 
Among specific activities of intracontinental cooperation will be 
the following:



1. Increased cultural cooperation such as exchange 
programmes in television and radio broadcasts, 
including documentaries from which we can learn and 
share common experiences.



2. Propose and host an inaugural annual African Science and Technology 
Fair for intellectual exploration of the field by Africans and dynamic 
discussions of how to apply science and technology in Africa's development.



3. Aggressively support the Pan-African Infrastructure Development Fund (PAIDF), 
which is financed by member states' public insurance funds as part of a larger 
strategy to promote trade across the continent. Improved infrastructure will 
reduce transportation costs and create a more compelling case for increased 
trade among our countries.



4. At the political level, support efforts to a attain African unity. 
Continued lack of unity with common political, economic and social 
institutions leaves us vulnerable to political manipulation from abroad.




CHAPTER LVII 

Relations with non-Ghanaian Diaspora



We will continue to collaborate 
with the non-Ghanaian Diaspora in a 
wide variety of areas, ranging from science and technology to 
literature to commerce and sports.


CHAPTER LVIII




Relations with Donors



We appreciate the assistance that Ghana has received 
from its donors over the years, especially in periods of severe 
economic and social difficulties. But we also acknowledge that 
excessive dependence on donors for our basic needs such as food, 
education, and health services diminishes our dignity as human 
beings and threatens our efforts to build a proud and 
successful society.
We will continue to cooperate with 
all nations and international organisations that wish us
well, but in order to ensure that those who fought for our 
independence did not do so in vain we need to start a purposeful 
process of reducing and ultimately eliminating our dependence on donors. 
This is embedded in our strategy for national development. 
The CPP will therefore propose a sustainable program to address 
African migration to the EU which also has beneficial effects for 
Africa's socioeconomic development.



CHAPTER LIX

Relations with Rest of the World



Our relations with the rest of the world will be driven by the 
desire to pursue the national interest at all times and will be 
governed by the principle of mutual respect, the protection of the 
sovereignty of the Republic of Ghana, as well as the projection of 
Ghana onto the world stage as a leader in fields such as education, 
science and technology.





A. JOIN US


This is a Peoples Interactive Manifesto and is inspired by you. 
We take the simple view that Ghana deserves be er and can be better. 
Yes Ghana can work again.
The fundamental truth that runs through this
manifesto is that Ghana will only succeed when working people succeed. 
It is an idea at the heart of our beliefs. And it drives our plan for a 
better future.
It means a country where hard work is rewarded with high 
wage jobs. It means an economy built on strong and secure foundations, Isaac
we balance the books. It means building a future for all our young people, 
so they can get world-class apprenticeships and access to affordable, 
higher education. It means strong public services, rescuing our NHIS. 
It means strong communities where power is shared by people and where 
we respond to people's concerns about poverty with empathy and creativity. 
It means a nation where everyone plays by the same rules, including those 
at the very top of our society.
And it means an outward looking country, 
seeking to help unite all the peoples of African descent. 
This manifesto is our plan to achieve these goals.
We encourage all 
people to be active in the affairs of the country and join the CPP in 
building better communities where all people enjoy political freedom, 
have access to basic services, and contribute to uniting the country and 
its people.
We can change things but we must act now.


I be GREEEEEENOOO # TOTAL SUPPORT.



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


The Convention People's Party (CPP) wishes to thank the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for its assistance 
in the printing of this 2016 manifesto.

43

