

CHAPTER XXIX

Agro-processing

Value addition to primary produce like 
cashew, sheanuts, coconut, oranges, 
pineapples, and other fruits will be 
aggressively promoted by ensuring that 
existing and new manufacturing firms 
develop relationships with out-growers that 
give them steady supply of raw materials 
for their firms.


The Industrial Research Institute and Food 
Research Institute will be adequately 
funded to undertake research up to the 
pilot plant scale to 
(i) replace the use of 
imported barley malt and malt adjuncts 
such as flaked rice, oats and corn with 
locally produced sorghum and corn,
(ii) 
produce corn/cassava syrup for our soft 
drink companies, and 
(iii) produce 
pharmaceutical grade starch.



CHAPTER XXX

Rural Transformation



Rather than viewing the rural areas as a 
permanent source of cheap labour for the 
cities, we shall guide the transformation of 
those areas from deprived communities to 
well-developed ones by providing them 
with a wide array of infrastructure, such as 
modern roads, electricity, irrigation 
systems, and medical facilities, to facilitate 
both agricultural and non-agricultural 
activities.


Rural enterprises will be encouraged with 
increased government assistance for the 
Rural Enterprises Project (REP) and similar 
projects. The REP has proven to be an 
effective project for promoting local 
economic development (LED).


Factories for making door and floor mats, 
bamboo factories to manufacture bamboo 
cups, trays, furniture and other products, 
rattan factories and wood factories will be 
encouraged. This strategy will stem the 
current flow of rural-to-urban migration 
and lead to balanced development of the country.



CHAPTER XXXI

Industrial Policies



Our industrial policies will embrace all 
productive activities for the effective 
growth and development of the economy. 
We must rebuild our industrial strength 
and we can do so under a CPP Government 
working together with local experts and 
indigenous players, to plan Ghana's 
industrial development.


Our aim is not just to save Ghanaian owned 
companies and factories from closing down, 
but to create new companies and new 
technology-based industries using, where 
necessary, new public enterprises as 
catalysts.


We will develop regional industrial 
development plans for every region 
through the establishment of 
development agencies in conjunction with 
local authorities in line with the national 
development plan. Their role will be to 
identify opportunities for labour intensive 
industrial production and crafts with 
potential for export and help establish 
them. The new development agencies as well as 
the potential factories and crafts 
will be resources for investment.


Among our initiatives to pursue our 
industrial policies will be:





1. Industrial competitiveness: Improve 
domestic and international 
competitiveness of Ghanaian industry 
through benchmarks to be jointly 
developed by industry and 
government.



2. High-value industrial employment: In 
the short-term, this will entail a focus 
on industrial activities that depend on 
local raw materials and are labour 
intensive.



3. Incentives from the state: Provide 
incentives to industry, such as 
discriminatory pricing for electricity as 
well as land reforms, to ensure easy 
acquisition and development of land 
for business.



4. Industrial capacity: Assemble experts 
to initiate the building of a machine 
tools industry for Ghana in the 
shortest time possible, along with the 
revival of strategic factories, both of 
which are critical to a modern 
industrial economy.



5. Agriculture/Manufacturing Guest 
Worker Program: The CPP will 
promote a program that can enhance 
the skill capacity of Ghanaian workers 
through an EU/AU Guest Worker 
framework that could be established. 
This will enable technology 
transfer/best practice 
managerial/operational and 
governance skills to be acquired as well 
as stem the tide of illegal migration and 
will have significant socio-economic 
benefits.



6. On assumption of office CPP will 
abrogate any EPA signed unilaterally 
with EU.



CHAPTER XXXII

Private Sector Development and Partnership:



Our private sector development policy is 
founded on our concept of the 
development of the productive resources of 
the country to satisfy domestic demand and 
export in order to achieve an internally 
sustained and balanced growth, full 
employment and prosperity. It will generally 
reconstruct the colonial economy that has 
been inflicted on us. This development 
approach will be part of our 
industrialisation effort and will be 
undertaken in partnership with the private 
sector.



The objects of our policy will be:



A. The encouragement of the formation
 
of identifiable cooperatives and 
marketing associations in primary 
production to which will be extended 
research and production technology, 
improved management techniques, 
marketing access, credit and a price 
support mechanisms to sustain and 
increase production.



B. The delivery of public goods and 
services such as research, land 
acquisition and water resource 
development that in totality will 
nurture and facilitate the 
development of big private sector 
firms that invest in and operate 
processing plants and provide support 
for large and small holders in 
primary production.



1. We will intervene in the market to lend 
a hand and stimulate the private sector 
to secure the strategic investments 
that are our development imperatives.



2. We shall go beyond the creation of an 
enabling environment for private 
sector development. Indeed our goal is




the development of the capacity and 
capability of the private sector for 
international partnerships and 
participation in global economic and 
trade competition.



3. We will develop food and raw material 
agriculture for the production of 
import substitutes in our food 
processing and beverage 
manufacturing sectors.



4. We will develop our brick and tile 
industry to produce building 
construction material and reduce the 
level of clinker imports.



This private sector development and 
partnership strategy will reduce our 
dependency on imports, reduce our trade 
deficit, stabilise our currency and lower the 
inflation rate. It will also expand the 
formal sector and widen tax net to increase 
revenue.


We acknowledge the challenges that will be 
faced in the implementation of this private 
sector development and partnership 
strategy. Among these are informal 
structure and low level of technological and 
managerial capability of much of the private 
sector.



CHAPTER XXXIII

Mining and Quarrying Policy

A CPP government will address the 
following major issues:



A. Galamsey 
The CPP is very concerned about the rate at 
which illegal small scale mining, popularly 
known as 'galamsey', is polluting and 
destroying our lands and water bodies.


To arrest this problem a CPP government 
will promptly resource and direct the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to 
work with the MMDAs and the Police to 
enforce environmental practices and 
standards in areas in which 'galamsey' 
activities are ongoing.


The CPP recognizes that 'galamsey' is 
providing employment and income to 
hundreds of thousands of Ghanaians, 
particularly young people, the 
overwhelming majority of whom don't 
have alternative sources of employment 
and income. Therefore, the CPP will 
promptly institute a programme to 
regularise and modernise 'galamsey' 
operations. The programme will also 
extend credit and provide plant pools of 
tools, equipment and machinery to 
operators, the services being provided 
currently predominantly by foreigners.



B. 	Enforcement of Immigration and 
Labour Laws:


Furthermore, in the mining industry, the 
CPP will ensure the enforcement of our 
immigration and labour laws by big mining 
firms. These firms will also be encouraged 
to practice equity by improving the 
remuneration of Ghanaians so that what 
they earn is comparable to what expatriates 
of similar training and experience earn.



C. Ending use of Child Labour:


A big concern in both 'galamsey' and the 
quarrying sub-sector is the use of child 
labour. We will end this practice by 
increasing the inspection of 'galamsey' 
operations and quarries and enrolling 
workers who are children of school going 
age in schools.



CHAPTER XXXIV

Manufacturing Policy


Manufacturing is the backbone of a modern 
economy, and that's why the CPP 
government of Kwame Nkrumah set up 
many manufacturing factories at a time 
when the private sector was small and 
government intervention was needed, as 
was the practice all over the world.


The manufacturing sector has declined 
recently due to lack of support, 
unavailability and high cost of credit, and 
unreliability and high cost of utilities, 
particularly power.


A CPP government will support the 
manufacturing sector with targeted state 
assistance to Ghanaian businesses in the 
forms of development loans, tax incentives 
and rebates, import duty drawback and 
exemptions, as well as encourage the 
banking and financial sector to make credit 
available and, with the collabora on of the 
BoG, bring down lending rates. Moreover, 
we will institute a special power service and 
rate for the manufacturing sector in order 
to make service reliable so as not to disrupt 
manufacturing activity.

CHAPTER XXXV





Energy Policy


The ultimate objective of our energy policy 
is to ensure adequacy and security of 
supply at all times.



A. Developing an Oil and Gas 

Economy:


We shall introduce a strategic plan to 
carefully develop all sectors associated with 
the oil and gas industry. We shall 
concentrate on production, refining, and 
export as part of the development of a 
petro-chemical industry. We will develop 
the salt resources of Ghana to produce 
products needed for the development of 
the petro-chemical industry.


We will make Ghana the petroleum refining 
hub of the West Africa sub-region, with 
large-scale petroleum refining capacity 
providing the region's gasoline, jet/aviation 
fuel, diesel fuel and lubricating oils.


The CPP intends to develop nitrogen-based 
fertilizers and other industrial and domestic 
products so that Ghana can derive the 
maximum benefit from the oil and gas 
industry.


The CPP shall revamp and retool the Tema 
oil refinery to meet the best international 
standards and shall establish a second oil 
refinery in the country.



B. Developing Renewable Energy 

sources:


A CPP government will develop renewable 
sources like solar, wind, bio-mass and wave. 
We will support the Nzema solar project, 
which when completed is expected to be 
the biggest photovoltaic plant in Africa 
capable of lighting 100,000 homes. 
The success of this project will give us an insight 
into how solar energy can be harnessed to 
address our energy demands.


Under a CPP government Ghana will invest 
in a wind energy program wherever feasible 
with topography from which wind power 
can be generated. We shall install wind 
turbines to generate wind energy.


The CPP shall therefore take advantage of 
the 1000 km wind corridor from the North 
to Ada that lies along the Volta River. 
Wind turbines to be manufactured from 
fibre glass produced in a to be reactivated

 


Abosso glass factory shall be installed in 
this wind corridor to produce energy.


The development of bio-energy and 
biomass will receive equal attention. We 
shall take a close look at the land tenure 
system with the aim of freeing adequate 
arable land for the cultivation of crops, 
plants and wood-fuels for conversion into 
bio-fuels.

The ultimate aim of the CPP is to have at 
least 20 per cent of energy requirements 
from renewable sources. 
The policy will have the following focus:

The key elements of the CPP's energy policy 
will be as follows:


1. Electricity generation: We shall, 
subject to cost, technical feasibility and 
environmental considerations move 
towards a progressive energy mix of hydro, 
thermal, oil, gas, nuclear, wind, wave, solar 
and bio-mass for the generation of 
electricity for households and businesses.



2. Capacity building: We shall 
develop a modern and well-resourced 
energy planning system to ensure that we 
generate enough energy to keep pace with 
our economic and social needs. The Energy 
Commission, the Energy Foundation, 
Public Utilities Regulatory Commission, 
Petroleum Commission, civil society 
organisations, and the relevant government 
ministries and agencies will play an active 
role in the development of this system.



3. Energy security: We shall 
diversify the sources of energy production, 
as stated above. As we do that we shall 
diversify the location as well so as to 
minimise the risk of failure or disruptions in 
supply resulting from a disaster or a 
catastrophe in any part of the country.



4. Regulation and ownership: We 
shall pass relevant legislation, where 
needed, to govern the production, 
distribu on, and use of energy in the 
country. While we will welcome foreign 
investment in the generation and 
distribution of energy in Ghana, we shall 
ensure at all times that Ghana has strategic 
ownership to preserve our control over 
strategic national assets.



5. Local Content and Local 
Participation:
We shall ensure that the 
Petroleum Commission vigorously enforces 
the Petroleum (Local Content and Local 
Participation) Regulations (LI 2204) to 
increase Ghanaian content and 
participation in the petroleum sector.



6. Financing: We shall ensure that 
all our energy plans are accompanied with
 comprehensive and credible financing 
schemes that will enable them to be 
implemented and managed efficiently.



7. Access and affordability: We will 
structure the production and distribution of 
energy to ensure reliable access for 
households and businesses at rates that are 
affordable and internationally competitive.



8. Management: We will improve 
the management of utilities by setting 
efficiency benchmarks and requiring utility 
companies to publish financial and 
management reports periodically.



9. Conservation: We will use 
legislation, public education, transportation 
policy, and fiscal policy to promote efficient 
use by households, government, and 
businesses of the energy that we produce 
and distribute.





CHAPTER XXXVI

Construction Policy



The main thrust of our policy in the 
construction sector will be to ensure that 
artisanal, craft, architectural, engineering 
and construction standards are set, are 
adhered to, are monitored and supervised, 
and sanctions and penalties are applied 
when standards aren't adhered to. 
To these ends the CPP will:



1. Revive the craft and artisanal 
apprenticeship and training system by 
identifying and resourcing master 
craftsmen.



2. Increase resources to technical schools, 
institutes and polytechnics (that are 
being turned into technical 
universities).



3. Increase resources to the supervisory 
training and certification institutions, 
the National Vocational Training 
Institute (NVTI) and the Council for 
Technical and Vocational Education and 
Training (COTVET).



4. Increase resources to the monitoring 
and supervisory departments of the 
Ministry of Water Resources, Works 
and Housing (MWRWH), and of the 
Architectural and Engineering Services 
Limited (AESL).



5. Ensure that the MWRWH and AESL 
collaborate with professional bodies 
such as the Ghana Institution of 
Engineers as well as associations such 
as the Association of Building and Civil 
Engineering Contractors of Ghana 
(ABCECG) to set, implement, supervise 
and monitor standards.



6. Implement vigorously the Engineering 
Act through the bodies listed above 
and other relevant ones, and by 
providing partial funding for the 
establishment and operation of a 
secretariat.



CHAPTER XXXVII

Service Sector Policies



The CPP's long-term objective for the sector 
is to create high-value-added jobs in the 
following sub-sectors:



A. 	ICT for local and foreign markets. 
This will facilitate the growth of the 
industrial sector while providing an 
opportunity for Ghanaian firms to gain a 
foothold in the global economy.



B. Real estate and professional 
(architectural and engineering) for local 
and foreign markets. While the domestic 
component of these services will improve 
the quality of infrastructure development, 
the foreign component will yield possibly 
billions of dollars in foreign exchange.



C. Educational and health for local 
and foreign markets through increased 
enrolment of foreign students in our 
institutions of higher education, and world 
class medical services for clients in the sub-
region and beyond. Both will yield foreign 
exchange while spurring us to maintain our 
educational and medical facilities at 
international standards.



D. Tourism: We shall continue to 
develop the tourism industry to create jobs 
and generate income, while combatting the 
undesirable aspects of tourism, such as the 
sex trade and other social vices.



E. Hotels and restaurants 
(hospitality industry): We will work with 
stakeholders to make hotel rates 
internationally competitive and raise 
the quality of restaurant and other hospitality 
services to world class standards.





In the retail trading sub-sector that has 
been invaded illegally by foreigners, the 
CPP will enforce our laws so that the sub-
sector is reserved for Ghanaians as stated 
in our laws.


CHAPTER XXXVIII

Environment and Natural Resources



The CPP's policy on the environment will be 
based on a Clean and Green Strategy of 
meeting present social and economic needs 
without depriving future generations of the 
right to the same environment and 
resources. In pursing this strategy, we shall 
emphasise conservation at all levels of 
society. With respect to the environment, 
we shall do the following, among others:




CHAPTER XXXIX

Natural Environment



A. Aggressively enforce laws against 
deforestation.



B. Aggressively enforce noise pollution 
laws in cities and towns.



C. Keep the atmosphere clean and 
healthy by outlawing the open burning 
of garbage in communities and 
residential areas. This will help reduce 
the incidence of disease and thus 
reduce the national health bill.



D. Encourage community gardening and 
tree planting.



CHAPTER LX

The Built Environment


To ensure that Ghana has 21st century cities 
and towns, the CPP will do the following so 
that there is a more coherent and 
disciplined approach to development and 
the process of urbanisation.



A. Develop a comprehensive urban 
development policy.



B. Establish an Urban Development 
Institute to study trends and factors in 
urban development, such as water 
provision and sanitation management, 
and advise national and local 
governments accordingly. The Institute 
will share its facilities and services with 
sister African countries as part of our 
efforts to promote African and 
continental cooperation.



C. Rigorously enforce standards in 
engineering and construction to ensure 
quality and safety by implementing the 
Engineering Act and providing some 
funding for its secretariat.



CHAPTER XLI

Natural Resources



We shall spare no effort to ensure the 
efficient, equitable and sustainable use of 
our natural resources. The Navy, for 
example, will be enlisted to patrol our 
shores to combat illegal fishing by foreign 
trawlers. At the same me, when outside 
investors are required to exploit any of 
these resources, we shall insist upon the 
state owning a strategic share such as the 
10% in big mining firms, and we shall 
ensure that appropriate taxes are always 
paid to the state.



Waste Management: The CPP's policy on 
waste management will be multi-sectoral, 
involving the Ministries of Local 
Government and Rural Development, of 
Health, among others, and will focus on 
waste minimisa on initiatives that deal with 
industry and households, as well waste-as-
wealth initiatives that emphasise re-cycling. 
Where some of these initiatives are already 
in place, the CPP will accelerate and 
intensify them, in view of the waste 
management crisis currently facing the 
country.





CHAPTER XLII

Financing Development



A CPP government will:



A. Enhance the National Infrastructure 
Financing Authority (NIFA) to source funds 
through municipal, national, and 
international bonds and other means to 
finance capital projects, such as modern 
highways, under-ground and above-ground 
rail systems, ports, waterways, and other 
forms of public transport.



B. Reform our budgeting process and 
introduce Inter-generational financing, 
based on NIFA, to replace the present pay-
as-you-go system, which is non-sustainable 
and is responsible for the massive under-
investment in our development.



C. Promote public-private partnership 
(PPP) in infrastructure development, by 
giving financial institutions tax incentives 
to build schools and other facilities, which 
national and local governments will then 
lease over a specified period, after which 
they become public property.



D. Weed out waste in the public sector 
as part of the productivity revolution by 
introducing transparency in public 
expenditures by asking all ministries, 
departments and agencies to publish 
financial and management reports in the 
media every three months.



E. Increase revenue by cracking down 
on tax evaders, tackling corruption in tax 
administra on, and imposing stiff penalties.



F. Simplify tax paying procedures as part 
of Customer care so as to reduce the cost 
and inconvenience of compliance to



CHAPTER XLIII


Beyond Good Governance



The CPP will be a responsive government 
with policies and pro-poor innovations that 
respond to the needs of the people.



CHAPTER XLIV

Fighting Corruption



1. A CPP government will deal with

corruption holistically, from greater 
state transparency, accountability and 
merit-based human resource 
management in public administration to 
comprehensive institutional analysis to 
identify where remedies lie.



2. A CPP government will increase

resources to public institutions such as 
the Commission on Human Rights and 
Administrative Justice (CHRAJ), the 
Economic and Official Crimes Office 
(EOCO), Public Accounts Committee of 
Parliament, the National Procurement 
Agency, and the Auditor General. We 
shall create awareness of the Whistle 
Blower Law, which encourages the 
public to report corrupt practices as well 
as pass the Freedom of Information Bill 
as part of a broad legislative agenda to 
improve governance and fight 
corruption.



3. We will ensure strict implementation the

Procurement Act by making sure that 
thresholds are observed, that oversight 
is practiced and that sole sourcing is 
limited to true emergencies.



4. We will focus on institutional reforms

that will simplify government 
procedures and structures, reduce 
discretionary powers of certain officials, 
and use technology wherever applicable 
to address actions of officialdom that 
precipitate corruption.




5. We will neutralise political obstacles by

engaging civil society and the media 
through the provision of resources to 
help expose and denounce corruption 
and put pressure on the government.





6. The private sector will also be 
instrumental in the CPP's fight against 
corruption, by policing its own codes of
 conduct and sticking to high standards of 
governance.



7. International organisations and bilateral 

aid agencies will be encouraged to 
strengthen institutional capacity and 
ensure the transparency of the projects 
they support.



8. Swift and appropriate sanctions will be

imposed for breaches of laws and 
procurement rules and guidelines that 
are contained in the reports of the Public 
Accounts Committee, Finance 
Committee, and Auditor General.


In adopting the above corruption busting
strategies, we are mindful of implementation 
and political obstacles.


The fight against corrup on must therefore 
be integrated into governance and the 
development process. Within our 
government there will be no more cover-ups.


We will make provisions for reports from the 
Auditor General and other corruption 
prevention institutions to be published 
without hindrance and provide special 
resources for civic society organizations that 
demonstrate capacity to investigate 
corruption and have the courage to publish 
corrupt practices. 

The CPP shall speedily implement the 
National anti-corruption action plan 
(NACAP).



CHAPTER XLV

Devolution of Power and Increasing Social Accountability



Citizens have the right to make public 
servants accountable for public service 
delivery. To ensure that this happens 
routinely we propose to amend the 1992 
constitution to allow for popular election of 
all metropolitan, municipal and district chief 
executives (MMDCEs). This will be broader 
than the CRC's recommendation of popular 
election of only mayors of Metropolitan 
Areas and against the Government's position 
of selection by the Public Service 
Commission and then election by Assemblies. Getting all 
MMDCEs popularly elected will have, among 
others, the following benefits:



1. Make MMDCEs and other local officials 
directly responsible to address the 
needs of the communities they serve 
instead of working to please the 
appointing authorities in Accra.



2. Ensure that all MMDAs publish on a 
monthly basis the taxes they collect from 
lorry parks, markets, households and 
businesses in their MMDAs and how 
they spend those taxes.



3. Increase transparency on development 
of MMDAs and raise popular awareness 
of their development rights.



4. Give opportuni es to minorities, the 
marginalized and vulnerable groups to 
take part in governance.



CHAPTER XLVI

The Constitution Review Process



After years of agitation for amendment of 
certain provisions of the 1992 Constitution a 
Constitution Review Commission (CRC) was 
established in January 2010 and the CPP and 
its members a ended its public hearings to 
contribute views and some submitted 
memoranda.


The CRC completed its work and submitted its 
report in December 2011. But no action has
been taken on the implementation of the 
recommendations since October 2015 when



a law suit that challenged the 
constitutionality of the work of the CRC was 
decided in favour of the CRC by the Supreme 
Court.


The CPP wants the constitution review 
process to be completed by implementation 
of the recommendations of the CRC. 
Therefore, from the beginning to the end of 
next year, 2017, the CPP will implement the 
recommendations of the CRC contained in 
the Report of the Constitution Review 
Commission, taking into account the NDC 
government's White Paper on the Report of 
the Constitution Review Commission of 
Inquiry. The CRC's recommendations fall into 
two categories, those that require referenda 
for amendment because they are entrenched 
provisions in the 1992 Constitution, and 
those that don't require referenda and can be 
amended by the Parliament. Since those that 
require referenda need to be gazetted for six 
months before referenda are held, the CPP 
will begin the process early in 2017 so that 
the referenda can be held by the Electoral 
Commission before the end of the year. Also, 
the CPP will get the Parliament to pass those 
that don't require referenda throughout the 
year.



CHAPTER XLVII

Legislative Agenda



To improve governance by fighting corruption 
and devolve power, we shall review existing 
laws and expedite passage of others to 
facilitate the implementation of our 
development agenda. These include:



1. All recommendations of the CRC to 
amend the 1992 Constitution that 
Parliament can pass, i.e., which don't 
require referenda, will be passed in 
2017.



2. Repeal Petroleum law and other natural 
resources legislations which are not in 
the best interest of the country.



3. Enhance the capacity of government to 
perform its functions.



4. Enact any other laws that will enhance 
the quality of governance.



5. Overhaul the criminal justice system.




CHAPTER XLVIII

Referenda



Some recommendations of the CRC to amend 
the 1992 Constitution require referenda 
because they are "entrenched provisions". 
We will make Parliament take action on these 
early in 2017 so that they can be gazetted for 
six months and referenda can be held on 
them before the end of 2017. These include:



1. Electing all MMDCEs.



2. Abolishing the death penalty.



3. Compelling the president to pay taxes 
like the rest of Ghanaians (leadership 
by example)..



4. Separating the Minister of Justice from 
the Attorney General.



5. Separating the executive from the 
legislature, i.e., preventing 
parliamentarians from serving as 
ministers, which would reduce executive 
influence over the legislature.




CHAPTER XLIX

Role of Traditional Leaders



The CPP shall adhere to the provisions of the 
Constitution pertaining to the institution of 
chieftaincy by ensuring that it becomes a vital 
part of the new democratic culture of the 
country as well as play its part in national 
development.


A CPP government will encourage the review 
of outmoded chieftaincy practices which 
inhibit democratic expression and impede 
socio-economic development.



CHAPTER L

Public Sector Reforms and Innovation



We shall ensure that the public sector keeps 
pace with the latest technologies and 
practices to enable it to manage public 
resources well and respond effectively, 
efficiently and speedily to the needs of the 
public. To address the problems of the public 
sector, the CPP will do the following:



1. Within six months of coming into office, 
the CPP shall implement the national ID 
system utilising local so ware developers.



2. Immediately launch a public sector census to 
determine the exact size of the sector in order to 
resolve the age-old problem of "ghost names" and annual 
budget over-runs.



3. Incorporate innovation into public sector management to 
ensure that the sector keeps pace with scientific and 
technological developments.



4. Improve the sector's capacity for policy analysis, 
budgeting, and management to make it effective and efficient 
in the discharge of its duties.

5. Hold public sector officials 
accountable
through stronger supervision.



CHAPTER LI

National Security



Our defence policy is first and foremost to 
secure Ghana's sovereignty, unity and 
territorial integrity in all areas - land, sea and air. 
The CPP government:



A. Will take an "out of the box" approach to building
 Police Mobility during our first two years in office by 
equipping uniformed and hidden patrols that can reach every 
part of the country.



B. We will engage communities and 
encourage them to form leadership teams which 
as part of their remit will assist the security 
services in promoting peace and security within 
the communities.
This approach for effective crime 
management and citizen security will, combined with 
our proposals for economic growth and job creation, 
make Ghana a safer, more peaceful and more prosperous 
society. Furthermore, the CPP will expand the role of 
the security forces in na onal development 

by:



1. Resourcing the Ghana Immigration Service to perform its functions well.



2. Equipping the Ghana Police Service, 
improving the quality of their training, 
and passing laws to make them efficient and 
responsive at national and local levels.



3. Holding anyone, including Police officers 
and Port officials, criminally liable for auto 
accidents such as those caused by overloading 
that result from their negligence.



4. Introducing computerised ckecking system 
for traffic violations to facilitate efficient 
enforcement of our laws.



5. Maintaining a well-trained, well-equipped, 
and well-motivated Armed Forces.



6. Providing a national framework to formally 
engage the Armed Forces in the provision and 
maintenance of infrastructure of all kinds 
for public use ­ at home and abroad.



7. Enhancing the capabilities of specialist units 
in the Armed Forces to support industry and research.



8. Securing the participation of the Armed Forces in 

disaster prevention and management and in combatting 
threats such as terrorism and narco-trafficking.



9. Creating a disciplined citizenry and facilitating 
the mobilization of every capable adult in national 
emergencies by considering the institution of a 
compulsory one year national military service for all adults.



10. Ensuring peace and stability in Africa by working 
with the ECOWAS and the AU.



CHAPTER LII

Judicial Reforms



We also understand that 'justice delayed is justicce denied'. 
We will therefore:


A. Ensure effective resource alloca on into 
the judicial system to enhance efficiency and 
speed in its administration.


B. Ensure the total independence of the Judiciary


C. Uphold the rule of law.


D. Ensure transparency in the administration of justice.


E. Encourage Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) to ensure swift and equitable administration of justice.


F. Commit to the establishment of the Office of the Independent Prosecutor.


G. Promote education among the population on the rights and responsibilities of citizens.



CHAPTER LIII

Ghana and Globalisation



In the age of globalisation,
where labour, capital and production move across national 
borders with relative ease, often at the expense of poor 
countries like Ghana, it is important that we adopt 
policies that protect us against the harmful effects of 
globalisation while also taking advantage of its benefits. 
This we will do through the following:



CHAPTER LIV

Ghanaian Diaspora and Political Participation



The CPP will pass a law that would enable Ghanaians 
living abroad to have direct representation in 
Parliament by people that they would elect abroad 
at their own expense.



1. We envisage a representative each from Ghanaian 
associations from four geographic areas like the 
Americas, Europe, Asia, and Africa.



2. Each representative shall be given a full
vote in Parliament
 would enjoy the same privileges as other parliamentarians. 
This is a win-win proposi on that would give our sisters and 
brothers abroad the opportunity to raise issues of interest 
to them through their representatives in Ghana, and at the 
same time contribute to the development of the land of their birth.



CHAPTER LV

International Professionals Forum of Ghana 


The continued loss of Ghanaian professionals to the outside 
world remains a major challenge to our national development 
effort. Although there is always reverse migration as non-resident 
Ghanaians return home, on average more skilled Ghanaians leave than 
do return. We shall set up the International Professionals Forum of 
Ghana (IPFG) to foster cooperation between Ghanaian

41

professionals at 
home and abroad in areas such as education, health, economics and 
engineering as an important part of our human resource development 
and management agenda.



CHAPTER LVI

Relations with African Countries



Our relations with fellow

African countries will be a continuation of the leadership role 
Ghana played in the continent's independence in the 1950s and 1960s. 
Among specific activities of intracontinental cooperation will be 
the following:



1. Increased cultural cooperation such as exchange 
programmes in television and radio broadcasts, 
including documentaries from which we can learn and 
share common experiences.



2. Propose and host an inaugural annual African Science and Technology 
Fair for intellectual exploration of the field by Africans and dynamic 
discussions of how to apply science and technology in Africa's development.



3. Aggressively support the Pan-African Infrastructure Development Fund (PAIDF), 
which is financed by member states' public insurance funds as part of a larger 
strategy to promote trade across the continent. Improved infrastructure will 
reduce transportation costs and create a more compelling case for increased 
trade among our countries.



4. At the political level, support efforts to a attain African unity. 
Continued lack of unity with common political, economic and social 
institutions leaves us vulnerable to political manipulation from abroad.




CHAPTER LVII 

Relations with non-Ghanaian Diaspora



We will continue to collaborate 
with the non-Ghanaian Diaspora in a 
wide variety of areas, ranging from science and technology to 
literature to commerce and sports.



CHAPTER LVIII




Relations with Donors



We appreciate the assistance that Ghana has received 
from its donors over the years, especially in periods of severe 
economic and social difficulties. But we also acknowledge that 
excessive dependence on donors for our basic needs such as food, 
education, and health services diminishes our dignity as human 
beings and threatens our efforts to build a proud and 
successful society.
We will continue to cooperate with 
all nations and international organisations that wish us
well, but in order to ensure that those who fought for our 
independence did not do so in vain we need to start a purposeful 
process of reducing and ultimately eliminating our dependence on donors. 
This is embedded in our strategy for national development. 
The CPP will therefore propose a sustainable program to address 
African migration to the EU which also has beneficial effects for 
Africa's socioeconomic development.



CHAPTER LIX

Relations with Rest of the World



Our relations with the rest of the world will be driven by the 
desire to pursue the national interest at all times and will be 
governed by the principle of mutual respect, the protection of the 
sovereignty of the Republic of Ghana, as well as the projection of 
Ghana onto the world stage as a leader in fields such as education, 
science and technology.





A. JOIN US


This is a Peoples Interactive Manifesto and is inspired by you. 
We take the simple view that Ghana deserves be er and can be better. 
Yes Ghana can work again.
The fundamental truth that runs through this
manifesto is that Ghana will only succeed when working people succeed. 
It is an idea at the heart of our beliefs. And it drives our plan for a 
better future.
It means a country where hard work is rewarded with high 
wage jobs. It means an economy built on strong and secure foundations, Isaac
we balance the books. It means building a future for all our young people, 
so they can get world-class apprenticeships and access to affordable, 
higher education. It means strong public services, rescuing our NHIS. 
It means strong communities where power is shared by people and where 
we respond to people's concerns about poverty with empathy and creativity. 
It means a nation where everyone plays by the same rules, including those 
at the very top of our society.
And it means an outward looking country, 
seeking to help unite all the peoples of African descent. 
This manifesto is our plan to achieve these goals.
We encourage all 
people to be active in the affairs of the country and join the CPP in 
building better communities where all people enjoy political freedom, 
have access to basic services, and contribute to uniting the country and 
its people.
We can change things but we must act now.


I be GREEEEEENOOO # TOTAL SUPPORT.



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


The Convention People's Party (CPP) wishes to thank the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for its assistance 
in the printing of this 2016 manifesto.

43

End of manifesto
