MaNIFESTO for A BETTER GHANA
OVERVIEW
A Better Ghana. Investing in people, jobs and the economy

A Better ghana investing in people, jobs and the economy

FOREWORD BY PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE

The NDC, for 8 years, between 1992 and 2000, did its utmost best to reconstruct the nation's foundation and build on such a foundation. The opportunity beckons once again for the NDC to seize the moment that a certain victory in this year's election will bring to our great party to put Ghana back on its reconstructive path and work towards building a Better Ghana. "A Better Ghana", because the current rulers have failed us miserably. In the areas of the economy, employment, the environment, health, education, the utilities ­ you name it ­ failure is the best mark that can be given to the NPP Government. Allowing the market forces free and unrestrained rein to give direction to our development agenda has failed to give employment to willing workers, leaving a nation grappling with a large section of its population very despondent. Life under the NPP Government is demanding from the unemployed and the wage-earner the surrender of their hard-won standards of living. It is restricting and abandoning those social services which are essential features of a democratic society. Those currently in charge of managing the affairs of state have certainly not done a good job of it in spite of their claims that the economy is on track. The facts and figures paint a very bleak picture of an economy that is not on track. A recent WHO Report ranked Ghana as the second filthiest nation in West Africa and the fourth filthiest in Africa ­ failure

After the NDC Government had virtually eradicated the guinea worm disease by the end of 2000, Ghana is currently ranking second behind war-torn Sudan in terms of guinea worm infestation ­ failure Water and electricity supply are extremely erratic or non-existent in some cases. It is very common these days to see people using lanterns in the city of Accra and with gallons trekking for hours in search of water ­ failure. The quality of education is at an all time low with 50% of JSS students who last year sat for the Basic Education Certificate Examinations, failing "beyond pardon" ­ failure. Things need to change and change is what the NDC is promising this country as can be seen in the pages of this Manifesto. As our teeming supporters now love to chant: "Yeresesamu". The NDC believes that we must place the needs of the working people before the needs of those who already have more than they need. We are certainly not against wealth accumulation by individuals and groups but as a Party that is anchored to the social democracy philosophy and espouses the tenets of our ideology unashamedly, all our efforts must be geared towards protecting and supporting the vulnerable, the disadvantaged, the marginalised and the have-nots in society. The youth in particular will be at the core of policy initiatives because we need to restore hope to them by investing in them and creating sustainable opportunities that will inure to their benefit and fill them with

a sense of belonging such that they will be committed to the Better Ghana agenda not only for their benefit but also for the benefit of the generations that will come after them. There is more than enough evidence that point to the fact that under the NPP Government, a whole generation is being bequeathed with hopelessness, despair, drugs, immorality and crime and we must rescue them from their precarious and frightening dead-end lest we kill their future and kill the future of our dear country. The NDC government will measure its successes (not that we are going to be obsessed with touting such successes) in the extent to which we shall be able to implement the policies contained in this Manifesto that will benefit the vast majority of Ghanaians by way of job creation and infrastructure expansion and the extent to which we will be able to provide Ghanaians with the needed social services. The provision of security to Ghanaians, ensuring justice for all, making the laws of the land work without fear or favour, as well as a committed approach to ridding Ghana of the drug menace, will feature prominently on the NDC's agenda. The NDC seeks a majority from the electorate upon the basis of a coherent and definite programme. We reaffirm our conviction that Social Democracy provides the best solution for the evils resulting from unregulated competition and the domination of vested interests. It presses for the extension of public-owned industries and services operated in the interests of the people. It works for the

substitution of co-ordinated planning for the anarchy of individualistic acquisitions. The NDC insists that we must plan a growth path that will lead to building a Better Ghana in which all with potential will be able to prosper. With zest, zeal, commitment, vision and love for country, a Better Ghana can, and will, be built. This Manifesto is the NDC's roadmap to building a prosperous Ghana. I am confident that with the Open, Honest Transparent and Humble Leadership I pledge to provide, together with our Team, the NDC and well-meaning Ghanaians, including those belonging to other sides of the political divide, we shall be able to build "a Better Ghana". This NDC Manifesto was created by Ghanaians of all walks of life and regions who spoke to Prof. Mills on the door-to-door tours. The policies and pledges contained are built upon the difficulties and challenges Ghanaians find most important. The NDC Manifesto is dedicated to those who work and contribute to their families, businesses and communities, but are blocked from social and economic openings. It seeks to empower every Ghanaian to access the necessities of life in security and play a meaningful part in developing our country.
Yours sincerely, Prof John Evans Atta Mills

CHAPTER 1.GOVERNANCE

Transparent and Responsible Government with service, humility and integrity are the core pillars of the Manifesto. The NDC will rationalize government ministries and form a government on expertise and competence ­ not party or family interests. The NDC will also uphold the Constitution by ensuring equality amongst ALL Ghanaians - economic and social development, agriculture and industrial programmes must benefit ALL regions of Ghana.
Crusade Against Corruption Corruption and the use of state resources for personal gain by a few has derailed earlier gains to better the lives of Ghanaians. Precious resources of hard-working Ghanaians are wasted in corruption. For prosperity to truly spread, the corruption must end. The NDC will:
1. Make no excuses for corrupt government officers.
2. Reorganize the Serious Fraud Office to be independent of the party and those in positions of power. · Allow it to investigate and apply the law fairly and justly. · Separate the budget of SFO so that individuals in power cannot play politics with investigations and hinder anti-corruption work. · Stop punishing SFO workers who investigate and seek to prosecute corruption.
3. Strengthen the CHRAJ to fight corruption - even without an "explicit complainant".
4. Abolish the Office of Accountability that Ghanaians believe protects corrupt officials.
5.Revise the law on Asset Declaration to increase transparency and accountability.
6. Enact a Freedom of Information Bill so the public has access to official information.
7. Support the role of the Media in promoting national unity, stability and security.

Law and Justice Ghanaians have told us repeatedly they feel denied justice because of costly litigation, delays and corruption. The NDC is committed to ending the system of two justices ­ one for the rich and one for the rest. To achieve this, the NDC will:
1. Support Alternative Dispute Resolution to avoid costly and delayed litigation.
2. Strengthen the Legal Aid system ­ including making some services free.

3. Stop the political manipulation of justice. · Place an upper limit on the number of Justices on the Supreme Court. · Empanel all Supreme Court Justices on all cases for consistency. · Separate the Attorney General from the Ministry of Justice ­ for efficiency and transparency.
4. Improve the delivery of justice by training all levels of the justice system, and bonding those that Ghanaian taxpayers pay to educate.
Human Safety and Security Security has been sacrificed to drug traffickers and gun wielding criminals. Ghanaians live in fear and insecurity helpless victims. Drastic improvement in the capacity of internal security agencies is necessary to stop Ghana's fall to the bottom. The NDC will:
1. Ensure the capacity and capability of the military to maintain Ghana's borders.
2. Support the contribution to regional and global peace efforts to spread peace.
3. Support and rebuild the intelligence agencies to meet the contemporary threats of money laundering, crossborder crime, human trafficking and environmental degradation.
4.Resource the intelligence agency to collect and analyze intelligence.
5. Improve the coordination and cooperation between security agencies.
6. Provide equipment, logistics, office and living space required for effective Police.
7. Broaden the selection and training of security personnel to ensure a genuine national character ­ as required by the Constitution of Ghana.
8. Support the Neighborhood Watch Program to boost the efforts of the Police.
9. Set up a truly non-partisan, competent independent commission on the murder of the Yaa Naa Yakubu Mandeni II and his elders ­ for long lasting peace in Ghana.
10.Prosecute all persons found responsible for the murder of Alhaji Issah Mobila of the CPP.
Combat Narcotics Ghana's notoriety as a political and economic leader has slipped ­ now it is famous for drug selling and drug use. Along the way, Ghanaians have become victim to the violent crimes drugs bring. Combating this dirty and deadly business requires the full force of the law and powers of the state. The NDC will:

1.Reverse Ghana's image as an easy target for money laundering and drug transport point.
2. Seize and forfeit assets of drug traffickers to meet national and international obligations.
3. Ensure fair and equitable justice ­ not just for drivers and petty dealers, but for barons and cartels and their powerful allies.
4. Sentences will match the seriousness of the crime.
5. Equip the security services and anti-drug agencies to confront sophisticated criminals.
Women and Governance We know that the health and education of women boost our development efforts, yet the concerns of women remain inadequately addressed. Increasing the role of women in government to participate in key decisions and make policy work is crucial. The NDC will:
1. Strive to achieve at least 40% representation of women, both in government and public service, as well as within our own party.
2. Promote and increase the retention of women in education.
3. Make reproductive and other female health issues central to the social and health policy.
4. Increase public information to stop practices that harm or discriminate against women.
5. Enact legislation to safeguard the dignity and rights of women ­ effectively return to our policies for an Affirmative Action for women.
Local Government District Assemblies are government at the doorstep of the people of Ghana ­ face to face. Assemblies and local government bodies were set up to represent the hopes, challenges and aims of ALL Ghanaians ­ including those far from the center of national government and those most afflicted by poverty. Local level participation in decisions and implementation of programmes should ensure ALL Ghanaians share in the benefits. The NDC seeks to deepen decentralization and reverse the decline of local government. It will: 1. Apply scientific, objective criteria to
the demarcation of districts (NOT political) and align sub-district structures with the new districts.
2.Review the confusing policies subdistrict and submetropolitan councils could not apply.
3. Make the Urban, Zonal, Town, Area Councils the operative government unit.

4.Fix the problems Unit Committees face so they can perform and deliver - to achieve true participation and grassroots democracy.
5. Make government appointees accountable.
 ·We must return to the original intent ­ to represent the disadvantaged and marginalized groups, and bring expert knowledge.
 ·Require scientific, management training for the DCEs before assuming office.
6. Make the District Assemblies and local officials accountable to the electorate. · Apply the Constitutional Act that requires Assemblies to meet with the electorate before and after each meeting. · Provide for logistical and financial resources for such meetings. · Provide for local radio to cover community issues and District Assembly proceedings and meetings with the electorate. · Make an Internal Audit Units responsible to the District Assemblies. for better local accountability and transparency. · Educate the public on its rights and powers to hold the DA and DCE accountable ­ including through the process to revoke a mandate or put up a vote of no confidence. · Publish financial allocations to the DAs so that communities act as local monitors.
7. Deepen the decentralization of government. · Transfer administrative functions such as company registration and passport processing to the District level. · Stop tying the DA Common Fund to projects dictated by the Ministry - allow priorities to be determined locally. · Separate the DA Common Fund from the MPs Common Fund. · Abolish the practice of giving part of the Common Fund to Ministries, Regional Councils and administrative bodies so the funds go to the Districts. · Re-integrate the DAs into the tender awarding process.
Public Sector Companies Public sector companies belong to the people of Ghana. They need to be protected and their values enhanced without compromising social policy. Political interests must be purged from public companies and standards of performance met. The NDC will:

CHAPTER 2.
A Better Ghana. Investing in people, jobs and the economy
1.Require public sector companies to put operations and efficiency over political concerns.
2. Not appoint Ministers and MPs to positions of Chairman or Chairwoman of Board of Directors of public sector companies to avoid intrusion of party politics.
3. Separate state ownership from the role of management in the Board of Directors so that the public sector companies operate under the same controls as private companies.

4. Make the Board of Directors accountable to shareholders as in private business.
E-Governance New technologies can reduce corruption and decrease the attempts and opportunity for theft of public funds. Projects must go beyond putting computers on desks. Technologies must be applied to make government officials more accountable to the people of Ghana.

1. Automate and network ­ compulsory ­ CEPS, IRS, VAT, Ministry of Finance, Controller and Accountant Generals Department, Bank of Ghana and other such agencies.
2. Make the computers work through networks and systems that enforce rules and processes.
3. Train technology users to be competent and to sustain use of the computer systems.

4. Use systems to monitor the actions of those in ministries, departments and agencies.
Honoring Promises The NDC is committed to implementing the objectives and policies set out in this NDC Manifesto. The NDC government will establish as Monitoring Unit that will watch and measure the implementation of the Manifesto's pledges and promise.

CHAPTER 3.
ECONOMY

An Activist and Enabling State Countries that achieve growth and development have states that facilitate and push growth, without regard to politics or family. With this as a guide the new NDC government will:
1. Work with Business Associations to support informal and formal private businesses.
2.Facilitate fair access to land according to the Constitution and proper ownership titles.
3. Mobilize credit and finance for onlending to legitimate businesses.
4. Give special attention to micro, small and medium sized business financing.
5. Make investments in strategic areas to direct private investment toward important sectors.
6.Reform regulations to be business friendly and compatible with rapid growth.
7. Create jobs, both directly and indirectly, especially for the youth.

Access to Markets Made-in-Ghana goods face tough competition. The sector has failed to grow, provide jobs, and push our economy forward. Achieving growth means supporting Ghana's businesses and industries, not making excuses for our market position. A new NDC government will:
1. Use all means possible to get relief in international trade arrangements to protect domestic industry.
2. Actively seek markets via the Export Promotion Council and Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
3. Achieve agreements with ECOWAS countries to provide aid in exchange for export markets for Ghanaian made goods.
4. Amend the Public Procurement Act to favour Ghana's goods in all public procurements.

Financial Sector Growth Government must facilitate finance to stimulate growth, and encourage investment and productivity. The new NDC government will:
1. Work with financial institutions to encourage lending to business operations.
2. Introduce special tax rates to financial institutions that lend to priority sectors, agriculture, industry, services and micro-, small and medium sized businesses and pensions.
3. Position Ghana as a financial hub for finance in West Africa.
4. Assist viable local banks and offer them incentives.
5. Support the Bank of Ghana's role as regulator to ensure compliance with rules and processes; monitor and supervise the finance system to protect depositors.

Industrialization Ghana's industries are hampered by a business environment that make them uncompetitive. The NDC provides a visionary industrial policy with clear targets: agriculture processing, textiles, minerals, petro-chemicals, pharmaceuticals (including herbal), forest and timber, housing and road construction. The next NDC government will:
1. Strengthen research and development institutions and their links to businesses.
2.Restructure the National Investment Bank to finance our domestic industries.
3. Decentralize industrial development to the district level.
4. Build on Ghana's oil resources to develop industries such as fertilizer and LPG cylinders.
5. Introduce duty-free inputs for target industries.
6. Specific industries that will receive attention:

A Better Ghana. Investing in people, jobs and the economy

CHAPTER 4.

· Processing agricultural goods - to benefit both farmers and industrial entrepreneurs.
· Develop limestone deposits at Buipe, Nauli and Nadowli for cement.
· Utilize clay deposits for brick and building materials for affordable housing units.
· Rejuvenate the textile industry, from seed production to processing and printing.
· Establish shea processing in all northern regions to achieve 50,000 tons per year.
· Support salt processing to benefit the communities and the petrochemical industry.
· Rehabilitate abandoned but viable manufacturing enterprises, such as Kumasi Jute, Aboso Glass, Tannery and Coir Fibre, Pomadze Poultry.
· Explore an integrated Iron and Steel industry at Oppon Manso.
Agricultural Growth Ghana's agricultural modernization has been stunted by poor infrastructure, transport, irrigation and social infrastructure. Yet Ghana's biggest strength is its agricultural base and it's potential to turn agriculture into industrial growth. The new NDC government will:
1. Make agricultural research and technology work to lower costs and increase output.
2. Extend the successful outgrower programme to more crops, including food crops.
3. Create a District Agricultural Advisory Service to advise on technology and marketing.
4. Promote rural finance: · Create a regulatory and legal framework for rural finance. · Build Central Bank capacity for financial flows to agriculture. · Give incentives to lending in agriculture.
5. Provide supportive marketing infrastructure ­ roads, fish landing sites, blast freezers, cold store facilities, rural electrification ­ all critical for agricultural growth.
6. Create a special pension scheme to encourage farmers and fishermen associations.
7. Establish a Buffer Stock Management Agency for food security and competitive prices for farmers during gluts.
8. Set up a Ghana Commodities Exchange to provide post-harvest infrastructure, trading standards, and contract standards that will improve financing.
9.Rehabilitate existing irrigation schemes and construct additional ones ­ with a flagship in the Accra plains.

Targeted Agricultural Sectors 1. Cocoa The cocoa industry faces future declines if the right measures are not adopted. The NDC will:
· Extend services to include brushing, pest/disease control, shade management, pollination and fertilization.
· Pay cocoa farmers at least 70% of the world market price, but not including the cost of pest/disease control, roads, scholarships, technology for production and bonuses.
· Process at least 60% of the cocoa produce locally, including plans for another Cocoa Processing Factory in the Western Region to reduce transport problems and increase jobs.
2. Industrial Crops · Increase production of raw materials for local processing, including cotton, cashew, rubber, oil palm, soy, bio-fuel plants, medicinal plants and coconut. · Give special attention to sheanuts (assistance for picking, transport, processing), dawadawa (develop for commercial and medicine), and cotton, as well as continued support for pineapple, bananas, vegetables, ornamental plants and flowers, moringa.
3. Poultry and other Livestock · Increase cultivation of feed to
reduce producer costs. · Use tariff and non-tariff barriers to
give local poultry support on the local market. · Support the large-scale breeding and production of guinea fowls. · Assist other livestock farmers to increase scales of production. 4. Fisheries · Improve fish stocks through education and enforcement by an equipped Navy. · Reduce post-harvest losses: increase storage, processing, freezers and ice facilities. · Support fish-farming in inland water bodies: complete stump removal, expand fish hatcheries to produce fingerlings, create Fisheries College to train and assist farmers. · Support and train Fish Farmers Associations · Correct the quality and management problems of pre-mix fuel.

Forestry The rapid exploitation of our forests has left disastrous deforestation and degradation. Large timber revenue has been lost to Ghana, the Districts and the forest communities because of illegal logging and tax evasion. Sustainability is the NDC's goal. The new NDC pledges to:
1. Adopt a plan for public and private Plantations Development and Afforestation.
2.Facilitate logs importation from African countries to support the timber industry.
3. Ensure timber revenues benefit the communities and the future of our forests.
4.Reorganise community tenure and rights of farmers to trees outside reserves.
5. Promote the use of lesser used trees (rubber, coconut and bamboo) for construction.
6. Assist industrial-scale tree farming in depleted Forest Reserves or degraded land.
7. Develop inland and coastal wetlands and rehabilitate mangrove resources.
8. Streamline the allocation of Timber Utilization Contracts.
9. Promote added processing and investment in technology and recycling wood residues.
10.Reinforce protection and management of National Parks and other wildlife protected areas to sustain bio-diversity, research, education, recreation and ecotourism.
Mining Deregulated mining has sacrificed our mining communities; they face conflict, dislocation, environmental degradation, unemployment. The sector must be reorganized to benefit communities and develop Ghana. A new NDC government will resolve the sector difficulties:
1. Strengthen environmental regulation and enforcement in mining areas.
2. Abolish investment agreements that make mining operations exempt from legislative reforms and national emergencies.
3. Capture more income for the communities and for development.
4. Ensure transparency in the management of mineral resources.
5. Expand and diversify the sector beyond the current minerals; provide fiscal incentives for iron ore, limestone and other industrial minerals.
6. Improve capacity of small-scale operations and reduce illegal galamsey.

Employment Policy Ghana has the resources for all Ghanaians to have a dignified livelihood through employment. The NDC's policies on targeted investment in agriculture, industry, forestry and mining are designed to create employment and opportunity in all sectors. Job creation must be backed by cooperation and consultation with labor for a Better Life for all. The NDC will:
1. Launch a major public works and infrastructure programme for job generation.
2. Attract outsourced computer-based contracts in the ICT "parks" across Ghana.
3. Train top SSS graduates from all regions of Ghana in ICT and mobile phone technology.
4.Require more products to be assembled in Ghana, to provide jobs and support a machine tools industry in Kumasi and Sekondi for a sustainable manufacturing.
5. Invest in manufacturing of building materials in all regions of Ghana.
6. Expand nursing and midwifery colleges and increase new student intake for medical jobs.
7. Support small businesses in the trades (mechanics, electricians, drivers, hairdressers, dressmakers, masons, plumbers, carpenters and others) with credit and training.
8. Give cooperatives tax benefits, access to loans and grants, access to public works projects and special procurement linkages.
9. Complete the Sekondi Naval Workshop for refurbishment of ships, boats and trains.
10.Make school systems relevant to the needs of labour and industry to produce employable graduates in fields that require a high skills base.
11.Offer tax incentives for private sector employers that hire new tertiary graduates.
12.Review previous and current youth employment programmes, adding new programmes for targeted sectors and for Entrepreneurial Development among our youth.

A Better Ghana. Investing in people, jobs and the economy

CHAPTER 5.Investing in people

The new NDC government will place social policy as its foundation ­ it is committed to social investment to make a Better life for all Ghanaians.
Health Care Malnutrition, poor sanitation, unsafe water, poverty and a shortage of health care providers equal high infant and maternal mortality, large gaps in health care between urban and rural, rich and poor. The new NDC government will promote and extend access to quality, affordable basic primary health services for all Ghanaians. Promoting health, preventing illness, and providing cures requires the full attention of all sectors of government. The NDC will take a multi-sector approach to health, and: 1. Improve the NHIS to extend access
to health services. · Review and streamline the
system according to its mandate and core objectives to ensure a national health insurance scheme as opposed to district health insurance schemes. · Target women between 15-49, especially pregnant women, to register. · Allow children under 5 to be registered by one parent. · To allow for a one time premium payment for registration with the NHIS scheme. · Register and give NHIS cards for infants at Birth Registration centres. · Involve private health care providers in NHIS, easing stringent procedures. 2. Increase education and training for all levels of medical personnel. · Expand Nursing Training Colleges. · Complete the School of Health Sciences at USD and U Cape Coast.

· Apply improved communication and information technology to medical training.
· Set up Medical Assistant training schools in Volta, Western and northern regions.
· Develop a reward package for lecturers in the medical sciences.
3. Motivate and retain medical professionals. · Facilitate construction and access to housing. · Work with health care providers to create a workplace free of tension.
4. Improve rural access to medical care. · Provide wide incentives for rural practice for public and private medical practitioners. · Post newly-qualified specialists to Regional and District Hospitals. · Equip Regional and District Hospitals with Pharmacists and other professionals.
5. Build infrastructure to reduce traffic accidents and injury.
6. Provide clean and potable water, and improve sanitation.
7. Extend decent, affordable houses for a healthier living environment.
8. Prevent illness from contaminated foods and drinks by strengthening the FDB.
9. Step up the fight against the drug trade to combat mental illness of addicts and prevent harm from violent crime. · Rapidly pass the Mental Health Bill. · Sponsor training for doctors and nurses in psychiatry. · Train mental health care providers to address growing problems in drug addiction.
10.Integrate traditional medical practice into existing health care systems; increase support of

research and cultivation of plant medicines. 11.Continue high level support for HIV/ AIDS and TB initiatives.
Education The lack of facilities, lack of motivated teachers and poor management are some of the weaknesses in Ghana's education system. The NDC recognizes that it is the right of every child and young person to access quality education, to earn a living and contribute to building a prosperous Ghana for a Better Life for all. The NDC has a comprehensive education policy.
Teacher Education 1. Bring all teacher training colleges
under Teacher Training universities. 2. Expand teacher training facilities
and institutions. 3.Focus training on skills for different
levels and subjects, emphasizing math, science and English for different education levels. 4.Redesign the In-In-Out system, with the Out segment a maximum of 2 aggregate terms. 5. Include ICT, creative arts, and citizenship education in teacher training. 6. Provide special training for preschool and Kindergarten level teaching.
Teacher Motivation and Retention 1. Improve salaries, accommodation
and retirement benefits. 2. Pay licensed teachers a professional
allowance of 15% of the basic salary. 3. Pay technical-vocational education teachers an addition 10% allowance of basic salary. 4. Pay teachers in deprived areas an additional allowance of 20% of basic salary.

5.Give specialist teachers in science and math 3 incremental credits at point of entry.
6.Offer on-going training through open and distance learning facilities.
Basic Education and JSS 1. Extend the "free" aspect of FCUBE
for poor communities by ending extra fees and providing uniforms. 2. Establish schools so no child walks more than 3 km to school. 3. Equip JSS for science, technical and vocational subjects. 4. Abolish the shift system at JSS level. 5. Provide employment and academic counseling at the JSS level to help JSS leavers. 6. Introduce transparency and strengthen management and operations of the school feeding program; expand coverage to include all primary level education.
Special Education 1. Provide adequate funds to train
competent personnel to support special education in the schools to address Ghanaians with disabilities and special needs. 2. Collaborate with GES and UEW to organize teacher training to upgrade skills. 3. Improve the supply of logistics for special education on a regular basis. 4. Expand and equip existing special schools and establish new ones.
SSS 1.Reverse the 4 year duration to 3
years. 2.Revamp the science resource
centres in selected SSS. 3.Raise the number of SSS to
increase uptake. 4.Restore science and technology
workshops to 2nd cycle girls going into science careers.

A Better Ghana. Investing in people, jobs and the economy

CHAPTER 6.

5.Assume water and electricity bills at second cycle schools.
6. Expand the curricula to include more languages, computer science and arts.
7. Make information technology an examinable subject at SSS level.
Technical and Vocational Education 1. Make a major policy shift to support
technical education. 2. Students who do not qualify for
technical or SSS after JSS will enter vocational institutes. 3. Build two technical schools in each district. 4.Rehabilitate and upgrade all technical schools.
Tertiary Education 1. Establish at least 2 more public
sector universities and improve existing facilities: · The University of Health and
Allied Sciences at Ho. · The University of Energy and
Natural Resources in Sunyani. · Give special attention to
improving UDS with a GETFund allocation. 2. Institute scholarships and bursaries for high performing students. 3. Prohibit demands for extra payments for printing, marking papers and other fees. 4. Encourage private sector participation in providing hostels. 5.Review remuneration and conditions of service for tertiary faculty. 6. Monitor quality of education by revamping the National Accreditation Board.

7.Rationalize and equip polytechnics to meet demands of the job market and economy.
8. Encourage linkages between tertiary education and business and industry.
9. Use distance education and modern technology for off-campus educational qualifications.
Youth and Sports 1.Focus efforts on strategic areas for
youth training and employment: · Formalize, regulate and invest in
Vocational and Technical training and Apprenticeships. · Provide District Vocational institutes, Apprenticeship Training and Production Centres and Job Placement Centres coordinate training, recruitment and placement. 2.Re-establish a Ministry of Youth and Sports to integrate sports into the development process. 3. Pre-pare a non-partisan National Youth Policy based on the 2004 Youth Manifesto. 4.Revamp school sports nationally. 5. Support the establishment of sports academies and combat exploitation of youth in sports. 6. Increase infrastructure for sports, with stadiums and gymnasiums in the regions and districts.
Fighting Poverty The gap between the average Ghanaian and the opulent rich has grown, with the poor falling behind in housing, health, water and sanitation, as well as education. It is no wonder despair has led to social tensions. The NDC government will face the challenges so prosperity spreads and all Ghanaians

live a Better Life. The new NDC development will: 1.Re-invigorate the Non-formal
Education programme to reduce adult illiteracy. 2. Increase inclusive development and accountability ­ with an outright attack on corruption and increased accountability and participation at the district level. 3. Increase access to all social services for the poor: education, community-based health services, clean water, sanitation services. 4. Address the problem of gender inequality: · Improve access to water,
sanitation and community-based health services for females. · Achieve gender equality in education, participation and completion. · Increase enrolment of girls in education and technical skills training. · Introduce better-managed microcredit schemes. · Proscribe and conduct public education on negative customs, including trokosi. · Enforce domestic violence laws. · Improve female literacy. 5. Address the problem of regional inequality: · Establish the Northern Accelerated Development Authority with a special fund from the Contingency Fund, donor agencies and development financial institutions.

· Accelerate infrastructure development in the northern regions.
· Harness the resources of the north with value-added processing, improved technology.
· Make strategic investments in people with more and better social services.
6. Target urban poverty: · Embark on a major slum renewal for improved housing and access to social services. · Provide a social security system for the informal sector. · Promote labor intensive industry to provide urban jobs. · Expand skills-training and job placement for youth to fill the job skills industry needs. · Reduce child labor.
7. Target rural poverty: · Improve agricultural productivity: Build infrastructure such as road networks and storage facilities; Invest in quality extension services; Provide subsidies to targeted farm sectors. · Promote simple and appropriate forms of transportation. · Provide incentives for businesses and public and private sectors workers to locate in rural areas. · Enforce accountability of local government and increase participation of the poor and disadvantaged.

CHAPTER 7.
Infrastructure for Growth

Housing Most Ghanaians know too well the problems with housing ­ overcrowding, poor quality, and just simply not enough places to live decently. Fixing this means lowering the cost of building materials and inputs, improving building skills and enforcing standards. This is what the new NDC government will do:
1. Create Land Banks to ensure available, affordable serviced plots, with proper compensation for stool and family lands.
2. Enforce land use planning and property rights, emphasizing District level accountability.
3. Set and enforce building and building materials standards.
4. Invest in large-scale local production of building materials.
5. Improve the distribution and access to imported and locally produced materials.
6. Upgrade building skills through improved technical education and professional bodies.
7.Facilitate access to credit for building and mortgages.

The NDC's National Urban Renewal Programme Ghana is reaching a time when most of us will live in cities. But too many already live in poor city slums. We must plan for the future of our youth in the cities. The NDC will:
1. Upgrade existing slum areas, Zongos and historical urban townships.
2. Prevent existing city housing from decaying by investing in improvement and management.
3. Improve security for urban dwellers with increased policing and crime prevention.
4. Support the continued social networks, traditional urban communities and heritage sites.
Rural Housing Housing for rural areas and small, outlying towns is equally low quality and scarce. For a Better Life for the rural and small-town dwellers, the NDC will:
1. Make land available for housing in partnership with traditional owners.
2. Provide technical assistance and access to low-cost building methods.

3. Promote erosion control and draining programmes.
4. Provide wall protection and roof loan schemes.
5. Support cooperatives and trade associations to assist in housing provision.
6. Involve communities in planning, setting standards and ensuring compliance.
Water Infrastructure Across Ghana, the poor continue to be harmed by lack of access to quality, affordable water, causing illness, disease, loss of work and school time. Yet we all know that water is the basis of a Better Life and the spread of prosperity. The new NDC government will: 1. Improve the role of the District
Assemblies in delivering and maintaining water supply. 2. Establish a District Works Department to speed up water delivery. 3. Abolish the 5% contribution by Districts and communities that block access to water. 4. Provide incentives, training and logistics support to improve private sector provision.

5. Set aside project funds for maintenance and establish spare parts distribution networks.
6. Invest in research and development of alternative water sources, such as rain water.
7. Urban Water · Create new water supply and treatment systems, and upgrade existing ones, including at Aveyime. · Protect water sheds that supply urban areas. · Examine the cost structure of water to favor the poor.
Sanitation Ghana's low access to sanitation and slipping health conditions risk our potential for prosperity. For a Better Life, the new NDC government will:
1. Supply materials, including local materials, for latrine construction.
2. Extend subsidies on latrine construction.
3. Enforce laws on sanitation by the District Assemblies and Committees.
4. Increase public education on hand-washing and good sanitation practices.

A Better Ghana. Investing in people, jobs and the economy

CHAPTER 8.

5. Provide hand-washing facilities at public institutions, especially at all schools.
Transportation Good transportation leads to productivity, health and safety, and lowers the costs of goods at the market. The costs we now face in time, stress, accidents and freight expenses are too high, mostly caused by corruption and playing politics. A Better Life through industrial and agricultural growth means improving the movement of people and goods. The NDC will:
Human Movement 1. Make MMT transparent and
accountable ­ no more trying to trick Ghanaians about buses. 2. Introduce a route licensing system to regulate city transport routes to reduce queue times. 3. Enforce vehicle standards and traffic regulations to improve safety.
Goods Haulage 1. Assist the private sector to reduce
costs of moving goods from farmgate to market and from storage or port to market. 2. Improve the rail system as a costeffective alternative to haulage.
Roads 1.Re-classify all road contractors
along transparent, non-political party guidelines. 2. Pay road contractors in a non-party, non-crony basis. 3. Emphasize maintenance in a regionally balanced manner. 4. Decentralize and make government departments more lean, accountable and effective. 5. Increase the feeder road network for improved movement of goods to markets and ports. 6.Focus on trunk road gaps: · Western Corridor: Axim ­ Hamile · Eastern Corridor: Tema to Bawku
via Nkwanta and Bimbilla.

· Bawku Corridor in Upper East and Upper West: Lawra Tumu
· Tamale Wa network: SawlaFulfulso stretch
Railways The current crisis in worker unrest and bad conditions is from plain government neglect. Improving the rails is more than just extending to new areas ­ the NDC government solution is to invest in existing rails and upgrade to new and modern rail sizes. The NDC will:
1. Invest in track repair and trains to move more passengers and goods.
2. Invest in management improvement and workers.
3. Prevent an unhealthy competition between rail and roads that destroys the road networks.
4. Modernize old rails with new size and technology, especially improving fuel supply.
5. Construct a new line: Kumasi through Wa to Hamile.
6.Re-establish the port by rail links, focusing on Tema first.
Maritime Transport Ghana's position on the coast and its inland water bodies provide a resource for economic growth and increased exports. This potential strength needs to be developed to realize our goals for increased industry, job creation and a Better Life. The new NDC government will: 1. Convert to a landlord port system ­
separate the GPHA regulatory role from its commercial role as landlord. 2. Attract investment to dredge and deepen the Takoradi Port for container ships. 3. Establish 2 more landing points on the Volta River to reduce transport distances. 4. Complete stump removal in the Volta to improve navigation and reduce accidents. 5. Install more pontoons at Yeji.

6. Enforce compliance with rules on water-worthy boats and loading goods and people.
Managing the Energy Sector From energy exporter to darkness and crisis ­ our energy sector must be fixed to feed industry, improve social services and make a Better. The NDC has the experts to make energy work for growth and spread prosperity. Across the sector, the NDC government will:
1. Apply the anti-corruption crusade fully in the energy sector - ensure transparency and enforced compliance with regulations.
2. Ensure enough and reliable energy for industrial growth and improved social services.
3. Train Ghanaians at all levels in the skills needed for a growing oil and gas industry.
4. Make the Tano Basin gas project succeed and expand the Osagyefo Barge project.
5. Implement the Aboadze steam turbine project.
6. Ensure quick completion of the West African Gas Pipeline.
7.Restore Volta Lake for more hyrogeneration.
8. Restore the finances and remove party politics from the VRA, ECG and TOR.
9. Strengthen the PURC as a truly independent regulator.
10.Invest in Renewable Energy Resources - smaller hydro projects, solar, wind, tidal wave, biomass and biogas - for future sustainability and lower current costs of energy.
Electricity 1. Increase generation to at least
5,000 magewatts in the mediumterm. 2. Add capacity in transmission and distribution. 3.Open the sector to independent power productions and private distributors.

4.Restore the NDC program to provide household access to electricity.
5.Regain Ghana's position as a regional exporter of power and gain energy security.
6. Establish efficiency in electricity production to bring down tariffs.
Petroleum We must restore transparency and end corruption in the petrol sector if Ghana is to benefit from our oil and gas and is to use our natural resources to growth our economy and invest in future generations. The NDC government will use its technical expertise and experience to:
1. Ensure Ghana benefits greatly from its oil and gas resources. · Apply oil and gas revenue to priority areas of education, health, rural development, infrastructure, housing, and water and sanitation, especially in oil and gas communities. · Enforce local participant provisions in the petroleum laws and agreements. · Develop the petrochemical industry utilizing local and imported natural gas and Ghana salt.
2. Double TOR's capacity toward processing Ghana's oil. · Review the monopoly of Sahara Energy in crude supply to TOR and VRA. · Investigate TOR's indebtedness and resolve the danger posed to its survival.
3. Secure strategic stocks of 90 days with BOST.
4. Lower the cost of transporting fuel to Ghana's regions.
5.Replace wood with LPG as the dominant cooking fuel and expand local cylinder manufacturing.

This Pledge is our covenant with the people of Ghana

A Better Ghana. Investing in people, jobs and the economy
End of manifesto

