NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY (NPP)
MANIFESTO FOR ELECTION 2016

CHANGE

AN AGENDA FOR JOBS

Creating Prosperity &
Equal Opportunity for All

(The party’s) policy is to liberate the energies of the people for the growth of a property owning democracy in this land, with right to life, freedom and justice, as the principles to which the Government and laws of the land should be dedicated in order specifically to enrich life, property and liberty of each and every citizen.

Dr. J. B. Danquah

My Vision for Ghana

Our nation is in crisis: a crisis created and sustained by the mismanagement, incompetence and corruption of the Mahama-led National Democratic  Congress (NDC) government. Economic conditions are worsening by the day and there is so much suffering in the land. But Ghana does not have to be like this. Ghana deserves the best!

I have dedicated my life to public service to change Ghana for good. As President, with the help of the Almighty God, I will be committed to a different kind of government, one that governs in the national interest, not for private gain.


As I travel the country over the years, I see the pain and sacrifices made by ordinary Ghanaians everyday:

* by the farmer who struggles to feed his family and send his children to school, but does not know, whether having made that sacrifice to
pay the bills, his children will even be able to get a job at the end of their studies.

* by the mother of the sick child, who has to walk miles on the dusty road to the clinic to get medicine only to be turned away because the clinic will not accept her NHIS card and she has no money to pay.

* by the young man and woman who, through no fault of their own, have had to drop out of school and cannot find a way out of life’s
difficulties.

* by the young man who, because of financial circumstances at home, never had the opportunity to go to school and is now sleeping rough on the streets of Accra.

* by youth who have worked hard at school, or the University, but still cannot find a job when they leave. They become street hawkers and even open roadside shops, but find they struggle to survive because the falling cedi raises the costs of their goods. Their shops also close because they cannot afford electricity bills.

* by the husband with a family of four who lost his job two years ago, because his employers had to close down the business due to DUMSOR and the high cost of operations.

* by that young woman whose wages can barely cover her transport fares to and from work and her share of the one bedroom she shares with her friend, and

* by the kayayei who have no opportunities or shelter and are forced to sleep on the streets of our cities.

It is for these people that I am running for President - for ordinary Ghanaians who have been betrayed by a government that does not care. It is to them that my Government will be dedicated.

My vision for Ghana is of an optimistic, self-confident and prosperous nation with a strong and thriving democratic society in which mutual trust and economic opportunities exist for all, irrespective of their background.

The next New Patriotic Party (NPP) government will place people at its centre. Their hopes and their concerns will drive its policies and priorities.
I promise to build a Ghana that works and gives each and every one of us the opportunity to improve our lives. A Ghana that works for us and our families, not just for the rich and powerful.
I will be a President for all Ghanaians. Whatever your region, your tribe, your gender, your status, or your religion, I will serve you all.
I will champion your cause with the help of the Almighty God, and every day I wake up as President, my first and only consideration will be what is best for the country we all love and what will improve the lives of all our people.
I have an unshakeable faith that our country, the Black Star of Africa, under the leadership of the NPP, has a bright future, a future that will be secured by the enterprise, creativity, and hard work of the Ghanaian people.
Join me, so together, we can build a country where, if you show up, step up, and work hard, you will have your fair share of its wealth, and be fairly rewarded for your hard work. A country in which hard work pays, and cutting corners does not. A country in which, no matter where you come from, you will be rewarded based on merit, not on whom-you-know-basis. A country in which every young person can hope, and aspire, and reach his or her fullest potential, right here in Ghana.

Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo


Chairman’s Remarks

Ghana, our dear country, is at the crossroads. We find ourselves in a messy economic and social crisis.
About eight years ago, no one would have imagined that Ghana could slip down this much from being one of the fastest growing economies in the world to a highly indebted and a highly distressed country.
Ghana, under the NPP government led by President J. A. Kufuor, moved from a highly indebted poor country to a middle income country as at 2008.
The question is, what could have gone so wrong to bring us to our current state or situation?
We are honestly convinced and strongly insist that this is due to the mismanagement, incompetence and corruption of the Mahama-led NDC government.
On December 7, 2016, the people of Ghana will have an opportunity to end the many years of hardship under the Mahama-led NDC Government and elect Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo as the next president of Ghana.
There is HOPE for Ghana. Under the presidency of Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, Ghana will rise again, and be on the right path towards economic prosperity, good and accountable governance in a stable and a democratic environment.

This manifesto for CHANGE is a blueprint for lifting the country from the abyss, and reversing the misfortunes of the NDC government under John
Mahama.
It is my humble duty as Acting National Chairman of the NPP, to call on all Ghanaians to vote for Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo Addo for President in the
2016 elections.

May God bless Ghana, and us all.

Thank you.

Freddie Blay
National Chairman (Ag.)

NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM
Chapter 1: A Strong Economy Matters 1
Chapter 2: Trade and Industry 21
Chapter 3: Energy and Petroleum 35
Chapter 4: Agriculture and Rural Development 47
Chapter 5: Growing Together 59
Chapter 6: Infrastructure 69
Chapter 7: Natural Resources - Land, Forestry and Mining 87
Chapter 8: Science, Technology, Innovation and Environment 95
Chapter 9: Education 101
Chapter 10: Health 113
Chapter 11: Social Development 123
Chapter 12: Governance, Corruption and Public Accountability 131
Chapter 13: Local Goverment 139
Chapter 14: Security 145
Chapter 15: Foreign Affairs 155
Chapter 16: Youth and Sports 161
Chapter 17: Tourism, Culture and Creative Arts 167
Chapter 18: Chieftaincy, Religious Affairs and Civil Society 173

Chapter 1
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM
A STRONG ECONOMY MATTERS

A strong economy creates opportunities, and inspires more people to start new businesses. In much the same way, a strong economy encourages existing businesses to make new investments, to grow, and expand. More and well-paying jobs are created, the private sector hires more people, and citizens prosper. Public sector-driven job creation interventions and initiatives also require a strong economy.
Social services such as the National Health Insurance Scheme, free quality basic schools across every part of the country, the School Feeding Programme, good roads and a wider and cheaper transport network, affordable housing, stable and affordable electric power: all of these require a strong economy.
Supported by a good business environment, a strong economy is defined by its stability, its growth rate, the levels and number of taxes, the extent of value-addition, the creation of wealth, and the prosperity of citizens.
Having jobs and livelihoods provide security for individuals, families and communities as a whole. When people prosper, the peace is largely secured.
Unfortunately, the economy is broken: there is widespread hardship and suffering, resulting in insecurity at all levels.
This is because John Mahama has been a bad steward of the economy and our finances. Seven out of every ten Ghanaians say John Mahama has failed on the economy, and is leading the country in the wrong direction.

I. A RECORD OF PERFORMANCE

Under the 8 years of the NPP government, from 2001 to 2008, taxes and loans amounted to GH¢20 billion. In contrast, taxes, oil revenues,
and loans over the 8-year period of 2009-2016 under the NDC would amount to some GH¢248 billion. The NDC government would have had,
in eight years, more than 12 times the nominal resources that the NPP had (Figure 1).

The question that Ghanaians should be asking is; how has the management of the huge resources at the disposal of the Mahama-led NDC government impacted on the economy?

Real Sector Developments

1. Between December 2000 and December 2008, without oil, economic growth increased from 3.7% to 9.1%. After declining to 4.8% in 2009, real GDP growth increased to 7.7% in 2010 and 14% in 2011 following the onset of oil production. Since 2011 however, real GDP growth has declined steadily and drastically to 3.9% in 2015 (Figure 2), basically the growth rate Ghana attained in the year 2000 which was 3.7%. President Mahama’s tenure of office has been characterized by declining economic growth.

2. Between 2000 and 2008 (following the rebasing of the GDP), the size of the country's economy increased from some $5.1 billion to $28.5 billion, a 459% increase in eight years (Figure 3). Even in the face of a global economic and financial crisis in 2007/8 (with oil prices reaching a record high of $147 per barrel), economic growth in 2008 rose to 9.1%. However, Ghana’s GDP, notwithstanding the discovery of oil, has only increased from $28.5 billion in 2008 to a projected $40 billion in 2016 (a 40% increase in eight years). However, between 2012 and 2016 i.e. during John Mahama’s tenure as president, the economy, in dollar terms, shrunk by 5%.

3. Under the NDC, GDP per capita has recorded a growth of 17% (from $1,266 in 2008 to a projected $1,481 in 2016) with oil revenues. Under John Mahama’s tenure as president (2012-2016), GDP per capita has declined by 12%. Under NPP on the other hand, GDP per capita recorded a growth of 187% in 8 years (from $440 to $1,266) without oil revenues. While the NPP increased per capita incomes by $826 during its term, the NDC, with twelve times more resources, has increased per capita incomes by only $215 (Figure 4). With twelve times less resources, the NPP increased GDP per capita by some four times more than the NDC. This is essentially the difference between competent economic management and incompetent economic management. It also tells us that fundamentally, the country’s problem is not about resources. Our problem is the mismanagement, incompetent and corrupt use of our resources

4. In dollar terms, under the NDC, the minimum wage declined from $2.12 to $2.02 by 2016 (i.e. 4.6%). Between 2012 and 2016 (during the tenure of President Mahama), the minimum wage in dollar terms declined by 23.6%! (Figure 5). In comparison, the NPP increased the minimum wage from the equivalent of $0.62 in 2000 to $2.12 in 2008 (i.e. by 244%).

5. Furthermore, the data shows that, as national income increased under President John Agyekum Kufuor in the 2001-2008 period, people at the bottom of the income scale became better off. In the 2009-2016 period, however, as income increased, those at the bottom of the income scale have become worse off. While income inequality, as measured by the change in minimum wage relative to the change in national income, improved by 1.8% during the 2001 to 2008 period, it has seen a major decline since 2008, with the worst decline (-5%) occurring during John Mahama’s tenure as President (Figure 6)

6. According to the United Nations Human Development Index (a measure of progress in income, literacy and life expectancy), for the period 2000-2014, Ghana made the most progress in human development between 2000 and 2010. The average growth rates of Ghana’s UNDP Human Development Index has declined from 1.33 (between 2000-2010) to 1.13 (between 2010-2014).

7. The country’s food import bill has increased dramatically from US$600 million in 2008 to $2.1 billion in 2015 (Figure 7). Rice imports, for example, have risen by 52% from 395,400 metric tonnes in 2008 to over 600,000 metric tonnes in 2015.

8. The agricultural extension service is on its knees with inadequate personnel and resources. There has been a freeze on the hiring of Extension Officers under the Mahama government.

9. The mass cocoa spraying exercise, introduced by the NPP government, has collapsed and cocoa production has subsequently declined. Under NPP, cocoa production more than doubled in just two years, from 341,000 metric tonnes in the 2001/2002 season to 737,000 metric tonnes by 2003/2004; and then to one million metric tonnes in 2010/2011. It has since declined to less than 750,000 metric tonnes in the 2014/2015 season.

10. For primarily financial reasons, the economy has had to endure five years of power outages (DUMSOR), with deeply debilitating consequences for the economy. The government is financially strapped and unable to meet its obligations to suppliers of gas from Nigeria, for example.

11. Electricity tariffs, thanks to high taxes and corrupt procurement of power generation, are now amongst the highest in the world.

12. In the 8 years of the NPP (2001-2008), the average fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP was 4.4%. In the last seven years (2009-2015), the fiscal deficit has averaged 8.1%, with three successive years of double digit deficits between 2012-2014 (the first time in our history).

13. The total debt of the country, after 51 years of independence, and at the time NPP left office in 2008, was GH¢9.5 billion. Under NDC, in just seven years, it has risen to GH¢100 billion in 2015
(moving the debt to GDP ratio from 32% in 2008 to over 72% in 2015).

14. According to the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), most of the country’s borrowing under the Mahama government has been spent on consumption, rather than investment. In fact, only 20% of total government borrowing between 2009 and 2015 has been spent on infrastructure investment.

15. At the end of 2008, the country’s total annual interest payments amounted to GH¢680 million, but this has increased to GH¢10.5 billion in 2016. Six times the country’s oil revenue is now needed to pay one year’s interest on the debt.

16. After 8 years of mismanagement, the banking system has been pushed to dangerously fragile levels. Rising state-owned enterprise (SOE) debts, debts owed by government to the bulk oil distribution companies (BDCs), and inadequate supervision of microfinance companies have escalated the level of nonperforming loans (NPLs) to as high as 19.3% in May 2016.

17. Lending rates of financial institutions have increased from 27% in 2008 to 34% in 2016. The days when banks chased customers with loans have disappeared. Today, banks prefer to lend to government, and not to the private sector.

18. The exchange rate, which stood at GH¢1.20 to US$1 at the end of 2008, has dramatically depreciated to GH¢4.0 to US$1 today. Over the period of NDC management of the country’s economy, the cedi has been one of the worst performing currencies in the world.

19. Teacher training allowances have been cancelled.

20. Nursing training allowances have been cancelled.

21. Nurses and health assistants are not being posted after completion of their courses.

22. Drivers and transport operators have experienced a dramatic rise in the costs of insurance, spare parts, license fees, DVLA
charges and fuel.

23. Taxes on businesses have increased dramatically and new taxes have been introduced. For example, increases in capital gains tax (from 10% to 25%), withholding tax (from 15% to 20%) and the introduction of the Energy Levy (10%), VAT on Electricity (17.5%), VAT on Financial Services (17.5%), and Special Import Levy. Taxes have also been introduced on ambulances and bicycles.

24. Government expenditure on infrastructure has declined considerably from an average of 11.5% GDP between 2001 and 2008 to 5.7% of GDP between 2009 and 2015. The 2016 expenditure on infrastructure is even lower at 4.2% of GDP.

25. Economic mismanagement has resulted in the country turning to the IMF for a bailout and to restore policy credibility. However, the IMF programme has not delivered.

26. The country’s sovereign credit rating has been downgraded from B+ (with a positive outlook), without oil, under NPP in 2008 to B- (with a stable outlook) in 2016, with oil, under NDC. This has resulted in government having to borrow at much higher cost.

27. The NHIS has virtually collapsed. The dreaded cash and carry system has returned.

28. The free maternal care system has also collapsed.

II. IMPACT OF NDC’S MISMANAGEMENT, INCOMPETENCE AND CORRUPTION ON THE WELFARE OF GHANAIANS

For majority of Ghanaians, the results of the Mahama-led NDC government’s mismanagement of the economy has been a worsening of their living conditions and economic circumstances. Most people have looked on in dismay at the corruption of the Mahama government through schemes such as judgement debts, SADA, GYEEDA, Smartyy’s bus branding, emergency power plants like KARPOWER and AMERI, and sole sourcing. For the vast majority of Ghanaians, the toxic mixture of the Mahama government’s mismanagement, incompetence and corruption over the last eight years has resulted in an explosion of suffering in the country:

* teachers are suffering
* teacher trainees are suffering
* nurses are suffering
* nursing trainees are suffering
* patients are suffering
* students are suffering
* traders are suffering
* pensioners are suffering
* drivers are suffering
* contractors are suffering
* civil servants are suffering
* farmers are suffering
* fishermen are suffering
* industries are suffering
* artisans are suffering
* kayayei are suffering
* men are suffering
* women are suffering
* children are crying
* Ghanaians are suffering

The discovery of oil has not made any difference in the lives of most Ghanaians, except for a small group of friends and family around the President. The country is clearly not working. The Mahama-led NDC government is not working and has no clue about how to get our country to work.

III. NPP’S VISION FOR GHANA

Our overall vision for Ghana is the development of an optimistic, self-confident and prosperous nation, through the creative exploitation of our human and natural resources, operating within a democratic, open and fair society in which mutual trust and economic opportunities exist for all.

We will build a democratic, open and fair society with the following characteristics:

i. a prosperous population with a high quality of life.

ii. a stable, peaceful and firmly united nation.

iii. an efficient machinery of good governance with strong institutions.

iv. a well-educated population that strives for excellence, and

v. a competitive economy that is capable of producing sustainable growth, jobs and shared benefits for all.

IV. NPP’S ECONOMIC POLICY OBJECTIVES

On the economy, our goal is simple: to build the most business-friendly and people-friendly economy in Africa, which will create jobs and prosperity for all Ghanaians.
We will ensure that growth is socially responsible, diversified, spread geographically, comes from genuine value addition, environmentally sensitive and fair to all participants in the economy, including labour.
To accomplish this, we will focus on growing the economy and creating wealth and prosperity for the vast majority of Ghanaians through private sector empowerment.
Our goal, inter alia, is to achieve double digit GDP growth annually for the next four years (under the Kufuor-led NPP government the economy attained a GDP growth rate of 9.1% in 2008 without oil). We will reduce the cost of doing business, maintain fiscal discipline, reduce government borrowing and reduce interest rates to spur private sector investment.
Our economic programme will enhance agricultural production and productivity, along with a transformation of the economy through value addition to our raw materials in a process of rapid industrialization.
There will be an increase in infrastructure expenditure as a percentage of GDP to eliminate critical bottlenecks in the areas of roads, rail, aviation, water, sanitation, and energy, and we will distribute infrastructure fairly and comprehensively across all parts of the country.
The NPP will invest in our people through the provision of quality education and healthcare, as well as affordable housing. The role of government would be one of providing an enabling environment for the private sector to thrive, as well as putting in place social policies to protect the disadvantaged and vulnerable in society.
In particular, the NPP will implement policies to invest in rural, coastal, zongo and inner city communities.
We understand that solid and consistent implementation of structural reforms and policies is ultimately the key to successful job creation and therefore NPP will implement prudent and sustainable economic policies.
Our government will secure the peace and stability of our nation.

V. NPP’S ECONOMIC POLICY DIRECTION

To achieve our objectives, our principal economic policy direction will be to:

a. restore macroeconomic stability

b. shift the focus of economic management from taxation to production

c. manage the economy competently, and

d. make the machinery of government work to deliver the benefits of progress to Ghanaians.

a. Restoring Macroeconomic Stability

The NPP will restore and maintain macroeconomic stability through the pursuit of sound policies on the basis of an enhanced institutional framework. Macroeconomic stability is built around three pillars: monetary discipline, fiscal discipline and financial stability. To reinforce monetary discipline, the Bank of Ghana Act, 2002 (Act 612) established the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to guide the implementation of monetary policy. The other two pillars (fiscal discipline and financial stability) have no such institutional anchors.

Enhancing Fiscal Discipline

Fiscal indiscipline has been the bane of economic management in the country. To address this, the IMF recently insisted on the passage of a Public Financial Management Act. However, the law, as enacted, is woefully inadequate, because it lacks the key elements that will protect the public purse from abuse. Fiscal policy implementation, as it stands now, lacks three basic elements; absence of a transparent institutional arrangement for providing quality fiscal information to the public, absence of a mechanism for ensuring accountability in implementing optimal fiscal policies to guarantee the stability of the system, and the absence of an institution to ensure the credibility of fiscal projections provided by the Government.
To address the problem of the current high public debt levels and the country’s high risk of debt distress, an NPP government will adopt and implement rules to anchor fiscal policy implementation. For example, there will be specific targets for the reduction of government borrowing and debt.
In this regard, an NPP government will enact a Fiscal Responsibility Law (FRL) to bring comprehensiveness, accountability, transparency and stability to the entire budgetary process. Under this law, a Fiscal Council would be established to contribute to the accountability of Government, responsible for setting up medium-term fiscal policy anchors to guide fiscal policy as well as monitor compliance.

Enhancing Financial Stability

In this year’s State of the Nation Address, President John Mahama attributed the problems emanating from the collapse of microfinance institutions, like DKM and God is Love, to a failure of banking supervision.
From what we know today, this is only the tip of the iceberg. The banking sector has been highly exposed to debt from BDCs, energy sector debts, and non-performing private sector loans. As a result, at least 8 banks in the country are on the verge of collapse if something is not done urgently. The financial stability pillar of the macroeconomic framework has been weakened under the NDC government. To address this over the long term, the NPP will establish a Financial Stability Council (akin to the proposed Fiscal Council) that is well grounded in law. Its mandate, among others, will include assessing the vulnerabilities affecting the stability of the financial system.

In addition,to restore overall macroeconomic stability, the NPP will:

i. undertake financial sector reform to deepen financial markets, promote financial inclusion, enhance the supervision and regulation of the financial institutions and move the country’s payment system away from a predominantly cash towards an electronic payments system

ii. implement a strategy aimed at repositioning the country as an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC), like Mauritius, within the region to create jobs

iii. formalize the economy through the establishment of a national database, using the National Identification System as the primary identifier, with linkages to the databases of institutions such as the Police, National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), Passport Office, Immigration, Courts, Ghana Revenue Authority (GRA), and the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority (DVLA), and

iv. stabilize the currency exchange rate for the long term through prudent and disciplined macroeconomic management, an increase in domestic production, and an increase in exports. In addition, there would be a reinforcement of section 40 of the Bank of Ghana Act, 2002 (Act 612) by keeping relatively stable, the ratio between the currency in circulation and foreign exchange cover.


b. Shifting the Focus of Economic Management from
Taxation to Production

The mismanagement of the economy under the Mahama-led NDC government has resulted in an increase in taxes on virtually everything taxable. This has increased the burden on the private sector and has become a disincentive for production.

To address these challenges, the NPP will shift the focus of economic policy away from taxation to production by:

i. reducing the corporate tax rate from 25% to 20%

ii. removing import duties on raw materials and machinery for production within the context of the ECOWAS Common External Tariff (CET) Protocol

iii. abolishing the Special Import Levy

iv. abolishing the 17.5% VAT on imported medicines not produced in the country

v. abolishing the 17.5% VAT on Financial Services

vi. abolishing the 5% VAT on Real Estate sales

vii. abolishing the 17.5% VAT on domestic airline tickets

viii. reducing VAT for micro and small enterprises from the current 17.5% to the 3% Flat Rate VAT introduced by the Kufuor-led NPP
government

ix. introducing tax credits and other incentives for businesses that hire young graduates from tertiary institutions, and

x. reviewing withholding taxes imposed on various sectors (including the mining sector) that have constrained the liquidity of many businesses

The ensuing increase in production and economic growth, arising from a streamlining as well as the elimination and reduction of some of these taxes, will more than compensate for any temporary revenue shortfall.
Growth is expected to increase to double digits starting 2017. Indeed, during the NPP tenure between 2001 and 2008, corporate taxes were
slashed from 32% to 25% and tax revenue actually increased! The data shows that, notwithstanding (or because of) the high level of taxes, there
is a revenue shortfall of GH¢700 million for the first half of 2016.
Additional sources of revenue, and therefore fiscal space to finance these tax reductions will include:

i. broadening of the tax base as a result of formalization of the economy

ii. increase in tax compliance

iii. reduced government expenditure as a result of increased collaboration with the private sector and prioritization of government expenditure

iv. savings from the reduction of interest rates paid on the country’s debt stock

v. increase in oil and gas revenues from TEN and SANKOFA fields

vi. elimination of corruption, especially in procurement of goods and services, which is estimated at about 1.5% of GDP annually, and

vii. plugging leakages in the administration of public finances.

The Auditor General’s Report has indicated that between 2012 and 2014, GH¢5.9 billion of government funds cannot be accounted for.
Collectively, these measures will more than exceed any revenue shortfall from the reduction in taxes.

c. Competent Management of the Economy

The NPP has a solid record of economic management, including growing the economy, holding down debt judicious use of public finances while displaying a high sense of fiscal responsibility.
The first transformation Ghanaians will therefore witness under the next NPP government, after the 2016 elections, is the transformation from the mismanagement, incompetence and corruption under the Mahama-led NDC government to prudent management, competence, and integrity under an NPP government.

d. A Government Machinery that Works

Under the Mahama-led NDC government, the quality of service delivery across all levels have broken down. Ordinary Ghanaians encounter deep frustrations and needless obstacles attempting to access public services from government agencies and institutions, including acquiring driving licences, acquiring passports, registering businesses, processing pension payments, processing payrolls for new teachers, nurses, doctors, and police officers, and land document registrations.
The NPP believes that the purpose of Government is to help improve our lives, that of our families, and our communities, and an inefficient government machinery defeats this purpose, no matter the investments government allegedly makes in infrastructure.
In this direction, in addition to managing the economy competently, the NPP will immediately deploy resources, both in equipment and personnel, in fixing the basics of the government machinery in order to deliver standardised services at affordable, transparent prices, faster turnaround times, and with professional handling of exceptions and grievances.

In sum, we will make Ghana work again.



Chapter 2

TRADE AND INDUSTRY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Unemployment today has reached unprecedented levels under John Mahama. Millions of Ghanaians wake up each day to the soul-destroying reality of joblessness and they spend their energies looking for nonexistent jobs. Young people complete school, acquire qualifications and end up frustrated, with no prospects of a job or a career. Young people, who have had to drop out of school, are unable to acquire skills or a profession, or even when complete schooling, cannot find work nor start a business because they are unable to find help.
The job market, including that for even skilled professions like teaching and nursing, which, under the NPP, had readily available jobs, have been hit hard as a result of the mismanagement, incompetence and corruption of the Mahama-led NDC government.
Since job creation, for us in the NPP, is essentially a private sector activity, the number one priority for the next NPP government will be to put in place the policy framework that will help businesses expand and create jobs, as well as promote the growth of entrepreneurship opportunities for young Ghanaians in particular.
The agenda for job creation would be underpinned by, among others, the following:

a. pursuing aggressive industrialization and value-addition to agricultural produce

b. providing tax and related incentives for manufacturing businesses in sectors such as agro-processing, light industries, pharmaceuticals, petrochemicals, garments and textiles, among others

c. providing a reliable and cost effective mix of energy supply for businesses

d. providing the necessary incentives for private sector participation in health service delivery

e. pursuing policies that will reduce interest rates

f. implementing policies that will reduce the cost of doing business

g. stabilizing the currency

h. providing incentives to the hospitality and creative industries that will enable them create jobs

i. investing in skills training and apprenticeships, and

j. promoting exports, especially of value-added agricultural produce and light manufactures.

The country’s industrial sector faces significant challenges, the principal ones of which are lack of access to finance, high interest rates, inadequate and poor quality raw materials for industrial processing, poorly developed domestic trade, weak consumer protection, lack of effective collaboration between research institutions and industry, poor trade facilitation, an unstable exchange rate, lack of coherent industrial development planning and initiatives, poor research and development
support scheme for industry, lack of land for industrial zones, high import duties on raw materials, poor standards of certification, and an unreliable and expensive power source.
Our strategy is to address these challenges in ways that enable industry to thrive and become a major source of jobs, especially for the youth.

I. BUSINESS FINANCING

The challenges of raising finance for businesses in the country include;

a. high cost of capital: interest rates hovers around 34%pa

b. inadequate medium-to-long term financing and venture capital funding, and

c. inadequate credit financing for SMEs

To address these challenges, the NPP will:

a. refocus the National Investment Bank (NIB) to provide finance for the industrial sector

b. establish an Industrial Development Fund (IDF) to finance critical private sector industrial initiatives. The Fund will be seeded and fed by funding from Government, multilateral and private
institutional investors

c. realign the focus of Ghana Investment Promotion Centre (GIPC) to attract financing and investments into selected strategic
industries, and

d. eliminate the current system of political patronage and restructure existing state-sponsored microfinance schemes such
as MASLOC to provide credit for SMEs, while strengthening oversight responsibilities over privately-financed micro finance institutions.

II. COST OF DOING BUSINESS

Businesses face a high cost of doing business as a result of:

a. high cost of production and the running of businesses in general

b. high cost of utilities such as electricity, water, and communications

c. high taxes, fees, and other charges

To address these challenges, the NPP will reduce the tax burden on businesses, including on imported raw materials and machinery for
production and on utilities.

III. EXPORT DEVELOPMENT

A key challenge to export development is the lack of a clear national implementation plan for export diversification and development.

To address this challenge, the NPP will:

a. develop and implement a comprehensive, project-based export diversification action plan based on the national export strategy

b. restructure the operations of the Ghana Export Promotion Authority (GEPA) to enhance export diversification to take advantage of EPA, AGOA, and Intra African Trade, and

c. provide support for organisations such as the Association of Ghana Industries (AGI), Ghana Exporters Association (GEA), and the Ghana Chamber of Commerce (GCC) for export promotion
activities.

IV. ENERGY FOR INDUSTRY

By far one of the biggest challenges industries and businesses have faced for more than five years is inadequate supply of power due to:

a. unreliable and unstable power supply for industrial production, otherwise known as DUMSOR

b. inadequate, industry-targeted power supply polices, and

c. high cost of energy across board for industries and businesses.

The NPP will address these challenges by undertaking the following
measures:

a. solve DUMSOR, the current unreliable electricity supply crisis

b. re-orient energy tariff policy to reduce the burden on businesses

c. promote the supply of energy in support of production-related activities

d. create dedicated quality and reliable energy supply sources for industrial enclaves and zones

e. provide incentive schemes for the development of specific renewable energy projects for industrial development, and

f. reduce significantly the operational inefficiencies in energy supply and distribution.

Chapter 3 of this manifesto provides, in detail, our energy sector solutions.

V. ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT

Businesses also face the challenges of:

a. inadequate public support for entrepreneurs, especially in the Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises (SME) sector as well as start-ups, and

b. poor management of entrepreneurship training infrastructure and facilities.

To address these challenges, the NPP will:

a. launch a comprehensive National Plan for Entrepreneurship and Innovation that will invest in supporting young businesses and start-ups, and

b. merge the National Board for Small Scale Industries (NBSSI) and Rural Enterprises Project (REP) to consolidate public resources in the provision of entrepreneurship training and business
development services.

VI. RAW MATERIALS FOR INDUSTRY

Inadequate and poor quality raw materials for industrial processing is one of the key challenges industries face. To address these, the NPP will:

a. provide specific incentives for the production and supply of quality, locally-produced non-agricultural raw materials for industry at competitive prices, and

b. provide a comprehensive programme of support for the cultivation of selected agricultural products as raw materials for agro-processing, including tomato, cassava, cocoa, soya beans, maize, oil palm, cashew, cotton, sheanut, selected fruits, groundnuts and rice.

VII. R&D FOR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT

There have also been poor schemes to support the research and development activities of industry. 

To address this challenge, the NPP will:

a. refocus the operation of public research institutions to provide R&D support for selected strategic industries, and

b. provide specific incentives for the establishment of R&D laboratories by the private sector

VIII. ACCESS TO LAND FOR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT

Industry has also faced incoherent industrial development planning initiatives, as well as lack of land for the development of industrial zones.

The NPP will address these challenges as follows:

a. facilitate access to dedicated land spaces in every region for the establishment of multi-purpose industrial parks, sector specific industrial enclaves, and enterprise free zones

b. aggressively support the development of existing and new industrial clusters and manufacturing enclaves, with a renewed
focus on value addition, skills development and jobs creation, and

c. develop vibrant commercial zones in our proximate international boundary areas to the north, east and west and explore the possibility of working jointly on industries with our neighbours in these commercial zones to create jobs, and as part of our efforts towards stronger economic integration of the ECOWAS region.

IX. SKILLS DEVELOPMENT FOR INDUSTRY

Skills shortage is one of the critical areas that the NPP will address urgently. In this direction, the NPP will:

a. establish apprenticeship and skills development centres to train skilled labour force for specific industrial sectors

b. develop, in collaboration with trade unions, a database for trained apprentices and artisans, and establish a National Apprentice Recruitment Agency

c. in partnership with the private sector, transform the apprenticeship training model from a supply-driven approach to a market demand model based on the German apprenticeship model, and

d. create an information portal and set up a task force to assist our youth and artisans in making their products and services visible on a local, national, and global scale.

X. DOMESTIC TRADE

Challenges faced by Ghanaian businesses in the retail sector include:

a. weak macroeconomic fundamentals, especially the exchange rate, lending rate and inflation rate among others

b. flouting of rules regarding retail trade

c. high level of taxes

d. high cost of doing business, especially the high prices of utilities and rent

e. inadequate access to government procurement opportunities and contracts, and

f. lack of governmental support for local market infrastructures

To address these challenges, NPP will:

a. ensure strict compliance with existing legislation and regulations in respect of retail trade

b. develop modern markets and retail infrastructure in every district to enhance domestic trade

XI. TRADE FACILITATION

Ghanaian businesses face many challenges in exporting or importing goods at the ports. These challenges include:

a. excessive bureaucracy at the ports

b. high port charges and fees, and

c. high incidence of corruption at the ports

To address these challenges, NPP will:

a. reduce fees and charges at the ports

b. introduce reforms in port clearing systems and benchmark our ports against some of the best in the world, such as Dubai and Singapore, to make them the most efficient in Africa to support
import and export trade, and

c. restructure the Customs Division of the GRA to optimise its operational efficiency.

XII. CONSUMER PROTECTION

To protect Ghanaians from inferior quality goods, products, and services, we will:

a. facilitate the passage of a Consumer Protection Law, and

b. strengthen the operations of the Ghana Standards Authority (GSA).

XIII. FLAGSHIP INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES

a. "One District One Factory Initiative": In collaboration with the private sector, the NPP will implement the "One District, One Factory" Initiative. This District Industrialization Programme will ensure an even, spatial spread of industries.

b. Strategic Anchor Initiatives: Government will partner private local and foreign investors to develop large scale strategic anchor industries to serve as growth poles for the economy, especially in petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, iron and steel, cement, aluminium, salt, vehicle assembly, manufacture of heavy machinery, equipment and machine parts, agro-processing, garments and textiles, assembly of electronics and light machinery.

c. Industrial Sub-contracting Exchange: Through a concerted, collaborative and collective effort, the NPP will enforce local content provisions by developing efficient and competitive local
supplier networks for the goods and services that industry needs and that can realistically be sourced locally. To facilitate this, the
NPP will develop a National Industrial Sub-contracting Exchange to link SMEs with large scale enterprises.

XIV. MANAGING INDUSTRIAL WASTE

The NPP government will support the establishment of recycling and reprocessing companies to manage industrial waste. This will extend the industrial value chain as well as create a new raw material base for existing and new industries.

XV. EMPOWERING LOCAL BUSINESSES

The NPP believes in empowering the local private sector and will pass legislation to require that at least 70% of all Government of Ghana, taxpayer-financed contracts and procurements be executed by local corporate entities.
In addition, the NPP will introduce a policy requiring that 30% of the required 70% be sourced from entities owned by women, persons with disability, and those established under the Youth Enterprise Fund (YEF).

XVI. SUPPORT TO INDIGENOUS QUARRY, BUILDING, AND CONSTRUCTION

To create jobs, whilst also supporting the quarry, building, and construction industry in the country, the NPP will provide tax incentives for the importation of quarry equipment, as well as facilitate the establishment of credit lines to enable the industry acquire state-of-the-art technology.

XVII. ATTRACTING FDIS INTO LABOUR INTENSIVE SECTOR

The NPP will promote greater integration with the global economy and encourage Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs), especially in labour intensive sectors such as garments, textiles, agro-business and light manufacturing.

XVIII. EMPLOYING ALREADY TRAINED ESSENTIAL WORKERS

The NPP will facilitate the early placement of trained nurses, public health personnel, and teachers who have been denied employment by the NDC government.

XIX. HARMONY IN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS

The NPP will work with stakeholders, including employers and trade unions, in an open, trustworthy and fair manner on employee welfare, as well as ensuring living wages for all workers. 

In this direction, we will:

a. develop, in collaboration with employers, trade unions, educational institutions and other state bodies, such as SSNIT, a database of the labour market with the view to establishing a
National Recruitment Agency to serve as the primary source for channelling job openings to Ghanaians

b. develop labour market policies to build an employable, skilled labour force that is focused on personal and career development to promote mobility for higher productivity. The policies will
also address industrial relations to enhance harmony between stakeholders, and

c. work with employers and trade unions to formulate a policy of comprehensive occupational health and safety standards

In sum, ours is a holistic approach to job creation. The job creation strategies outlined in this chapter are by no means exhaustive. Other
job creation initiatives have been covered under the other sectors in this manifesto.

Chapter 3
ENERGY AND PETROLEUM

Under the Kufuor-led NPP government (2001-2008), significant contributions were made to the country’s energy resources and infrastructure as a result of our bold and farsighted policies. These
included:

i. the discovery of oil and gas in commercial quantities

ii. the construction of the West African Gas Pipeline

iii. in response to the emerging energy crisis of 2006/2007, through facilitations, procurements, and construction, an addition of 1440MW to Ghana’s generating capacity as follows:

* Bui Dam (400MW)

* Tema Thermal 1 Power Plant - TT1PP (126MW)

* Tema Thermal 2 Power Plant – TT2PP (49MW)

* Mines Reserve Plants (80MW)

* Kpone Thermal Power Plant (220MW)

* Additions to Akosombo Hydro Power (108MW)

* Takoradi 1 Power Plant – T1, Aboadze (132MW)

* Sunon Asogli Plant (200MW), and

* Osonor (now CENIT) Plant (126MW)

I. POWER SECTOR

The NDC government inherited an economy with no DUMSOR in 2009. However, the energy sector has since been badly managed. The poor management of the sector has been characterized by shortfalls in power generation, corrupt and opaque procurement of new power plants, frequent power cuts, inefficiencies and unsustainable inter-utility debts, which threaten the satisfactory long-term operation of the power sector.

These problems have led to five years of DUMSOR and brought devastation to our industries, particularly small businesses. DUMSOR has caused job losses, income losses, unnecessary deaths, disrupted life and destroyed countless equipment and electrical appliances of businesses and homes.
The effect of the last five years of DUMSOR on our economy has been devastating. The Institute of Statistical Scientific and Economic Research
(ISSER), in its 2014 study, indicates, that on average, the country is losing production worth about US$ 2.1 million per day (or, US$ 55.8 million per month) as a result of DUMSOR alone and that, the country lost about US$680 million in 2014 translating into about 2% of GDP due to the power crisis.
Whilst the President is engaged in questionable power procurements, our dedicated state-owned power infrastructure from which revenue is generated by our utilities is collapsing. Akosombo has constantly been over-drafted, thermal plants are frequently breaking down; and all our plants operate below capacity. The Takoradi 3 Thermal plant has been shut down, although it was commissioned only two years ago. It is not surprising, therefore, that the country’s efforts in industrialization is clearly in danger under the Mahama-led NDC government.
Today, the energy sector faces an unprecedented financial crisis. The very existence of our biggest electricity generator, the Volta River Authority (VRA), is under serious threat, as its debts continue to increase. VRA’s debts stand at US$1.53 billion as of March 2016. These debts, which exclude current interest, roll-over fees and other charges are expected to hit $2 billion by the end of this year. This is not only affecting VRA’s survival, but also the domestic banking sector.
Rather than redeem its indebtedness, the government chose to burden the Ghanaian people with suffocating electricity tariffs and vanishing
power credits. The government’s response to the large inter-utility debts is to impose additional taxes on the use of petroleum products and electricity. This has further reduced the competitiveness of our local industries. The cost of electricity to industry has been so alarmingly high it has led to the collapse of many industries and small businesses and to the relocation of others to neighbouring Cote d’Ivoire.
It is now clear that Mahama has run out of things on which to blame DUMSOR. From acts of God, to blaming Nigeria, to wishing it away, it is obvious that, five years into this state of affairs and Mahama announcing that he had fixed DUMSOR, he does not know how to provide Ghanaians with a long-term, stable and reliable electricity supply.
The hard, cold truth is that despite the recent election-inspired, artificial semblance of stability in the power supply situation, the fundamental challenges leading to DUMSOR remain, and the quick fixes have instead resulted in the imposition of high cost emergency plants on Ghanaians, corruptly procured from AMERI and KARPOWER. We still owe millions of United States Dollars to Nigeria for gas supplies.
In fact, Mahama’s greatest legacy to Ghana as President is DUMSOR.
There is increased uncertainty about the future stability of power supply under the NDC government. Many businesses and residential consumers of electricity are justifiably afraid that DUMSOR would come back, if the NDC is retained in power, as it has not demonstrated capacity in addressing these challenges.
The nation must change course if we are to stop job losses, poor management of our energy sector and eliminate the financial burden imposed by government on our utility companies.

What the NPP will do:

The NPP’s vision for the energy sector is to develop a modern, diversified, efficient, and financially sustainable "Energy Economy" that will ensure that all Ghanaian homes and industries have access to an adequate, reliable, affordable and environmentally-sustainable supply of energy to meet their needs and to support the accelerated growth and development agenda we envisage for the country.

The NPP will achieve these goals through the following measures:

a. end "DUMSOR" in the short-term, through government liquidity injection, restructuring of debts, and securing of firm commitments for the reliable supply of fuel

b. reduce taxes on electricity tariffs to provide immediate relief to households and industry

c. conduct a technical audit on all power sector infrastructure and develop and implement a 10-year Power Sector Master Plan which will be reviewed thereafter, to meet our medium to long-term energy needs

d. ensure that the procurement of new power projects are executed primarily through PPP and IPP arrangements, which will be carried out in a transparent and competitive manner in order to achieve a least-cost addition of power generation infrastructure. The current basis for procuring additional generation assets is inefficient and costly, and discourages production

e. develop and implement an Energy Sector Financial Restructuring and Recovery Plan, incorporating, a liquidity management mechanism for VRA, Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG), Northern Electricity Department (NED) and the BDCs

f. leverage natural gas as a long term source central to the operation of the power sector. Consequently, the NPP will develop and
implement a long-term LNG utilization programme. In addition, the NPP will encourage and provide incentives to the private sector to develop aggressively potential sources of indigenous natural gas in addition to those from the Jubilee, TEN and SANKOFA oil/gas fields

g. ensure that there is sufficient Reserve Margin – the safety cushion we need to prevent blackouts – to ensure the stability of the system

h. rapidly move to the adoption of a distributed solar energy solution for all government and public buildings

i. create an environment of clear policies, rules and regulations, and provide adequate price incentives to attract private sector investments. The NPP will prioritise and ensure actions to enhance and improve the capacity of the regulatory bodies, namely the Public Utilities Regulatory Commission (PURC) and Energy Commission (EC) to discharge their responsibilities in a more transparent, timely and efficient manner. The objective will be to ensure that costs in the sector are recovered in a timely manner, the utilities receive a fair return on their investments and consumers pay only for acceptable and efficient operation of the utilities

j. aggressively pursue energy conservation and the efficient use of energy, including reduction of transmission losses. In 2007, the NPP government led a nationwide free distribution of 6 million compact fluorescent bulbs to consumers to replace incandescent bulbs, which led to a saving of about 200MW. We will implement similar initiatives involving LED bulbs and the introduction of Minimum Energy Performance Standards for electric motors and industrial equipment

k. ensure that energy is produced and used in an environmentally sound manner

l. work within the framework of Ghana’s obligations under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), UN Framework on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Conference of Parties 2015 (COP21). Under this framework, the NPP will ensure that least cost environmentally friendly technologies are prioritized in the expansion of the country’s thermal generation portfolio. In particular the Renewable Energy law will be reviewed to regulate and incentivise investments in renewable technologies

m. restructure the power sector by bringing all hydro generation exclusively under VRA and create a separate thermal market, and

n. explore the possibility of geothermal and tidal wave energy.

Renewable Energy Development

Ghana should develop low carbon energy to ensure environmental sustainability, energy security through diversity of energy sources and the creation of green jobs.

In this direction, the NPP will:

i. increase the proportion of renewable energy in the national generation mix by harnessing alternative energy options to ensure the expansion of low carbon energy in our economy

ii. rapidly move to the adoption of a distributed solar energy solution for all government and public buildings to reduce demand on the national grid and reduce government expenditure on electricity

iii. build solar parks in the northern part of the country. To achieve this, we will provide investment tax credits to owners of commercial, industrial, and utility scale solar photovoltaic (PV) systems to take a one-time tax credit of qualified installed costs

iv. develop solar and wind mini-grids for irrigation and community water supply around the country through Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), and

v. ensure local supply of solar panels to meet the requirement of our policy proposals, by establishing a Renewable Energy Industrial Zone where the private sector will be supported to build factories for the production and assembling of the full components of solar power systems.

II. PETROLEUM SECTOR

In 2007, when commercial quantities of oil and gas were discovered in the Jubilee Fields as a result of the Kufuor-led NPP government’s bold
and farsighted policies, many Ghanaians hoped for improved conditions of living through the transformative effect of oil.

Ghana produced first oil in 2009. Seven years on, many Ghanaians have lost hope in the promise of oil. What they see under the Mahama-led NDC government is an unrestrained move towards what is popularly called the "oil curse". The oil and gas sector has been poorly managed to the extent that our oil is exported in crude form, even though we have a refinery that can add value to it. Ghana’s oil industry no longer attracts serious investors, despite the substantial de-risking of some of our oil basins. Inexperienced and unknown companies are holding exclusive oil rights in our basins, most of whom are not fulfilling their work obligations. Countries that have benefited significantly from oil implemented policies that accelerated value addition to the economy, by promoting the development of forward and backward linkages and by investing revenue from oil in strategic social and economic programmes. This has not been the case in Ghana. Ghanaians are yet to feel the impact of the oil and gas sector seven years into production although US$3 billion has been received by government as its share of the revenue from oil.
Holders of Ghana’s Petroleum Agreements are unsuccessfully shopping for money because they have no track record, leaving our oil blocks inactive. This situation is the result of the lack of credible processes for ensuring a transparent and efficient allocation of exploration rights.
In the downstream sector, the Mahama-led NDC government’s failure to finance petroleum subsidies, occasioned by exchange losses and manipulations of the automatic price adjustment formula, have led to huge accumulation of debts by BDCs, some of which can no longer raise letters of credit to support petroleum importation.
Rather than solve the problem, the government chose to kill the local companies by taking their businesses for the Bulk Oil Storage Transportation Company (BOST), which was established to keep strategic reserves, thereby undermining the indigenization policy in the downstream petroleum sub-sector and contributing to job and revenue losses. In the process, BOST has moved away from its core mandate and become virtually the sole importer of crude oil under arrangements that are not transparent.
In addition to this, the implementation of the petroleum price deregulation policy is facing some difficulties. Crude oil price reductions do not translate into pump prices, as a result of the government’s appetite for revenue, and this has deepened the macroeconomic instability which has further contributed to a loss of business confidence.

What The NPP will do:

The NPP commits to a transparent, accountable and efficient management of the country’s petroleum resources for the benefit of all Ghanaians.

In pursuant of this, the NPP will:

Petroleum Upstream and Mid-Stream Sector

a. improve transparency in the management of our oil and gas resources. Our commitment to passing the Right to Information Bill will further enhance transparency in the oil and gas sector

b. create an enabling environment through fiscal and non-fiscal measures to attract domestic and foreign investments in oil and gas exploration

c. in collaboration with the private sector, accelerate oil exploration in the Voltaian Basin (Northern, Volta, Ashanti, Eastern, and Brong Ahafo), as well as in the Keta and Accra Basins to enhance Ghana’s potential for increasing oil and gas production and to build these areas into industrial growth poles

d. develop, in collaboration with the private sector, Western Region into a regional oil services hub with a first class port facility, as well as positioning it as an efficient centre for back-office support for the oil industry in the West African region, including the relocation of the headquarters of GNPC to the region

e. empower local firms to play progressively active roles in the oil and gas value chain through capacity development, financing and partnership support

f. aggressively invest in education and skills enhancement of Ghanaians to manage the oil and gas sector under an "Accelerated Oil Capacity Development Programme"

g. in collaboration with the private sector, create jobs in high impact areas such as fabrication and installation, manufacturing of equipment and parts and the construction of oil and gas infrastructure, and

h. restructure the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation to focus on its core mandate, improve on its corporate governance and become a national vehicle for maximizing the value of our oil and
gas resources.

Petroleum Downstream

a. support the growth of local competition by redeeming government obligations to the BDCs

b. address macroeconomic instability to ensure the effective implementation of the petroleum price deregulation policy

c. expand the Tema Oil Refinery (TOR) and ensure BOST reverts to its core mandate of protecting our strategic petroleum reserves

d. ensure that crude oil produced in Ghana is refined here to add value to our oil and to build a petrochemical industry as an important growth pillar for the economy

e. improve on the quality of fuel produced in Ghana or imported by reviewing the standards for sulphur content in the fuels. This will ensure that low sulphur fuel is sold to consumers to reduce the risks of poor quality fuels to the environment, health and durability of motor vehicles, and

f. facilitate, in collaboration with the private sector, the establishment of an oil refinery in Sekondi-Takoradi.

III. PETROLEUM REVENUE MANAGEMENT

i. review and further amend the Petroleum Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815) to support investment of revenue from oil in high-impact strategic social and economic infrastructure

ii. between 2017 and 2020, primarily allocate revenue from oil to infrastructure, health, education and agriculture

iii. leverage oil revenue to complete the Accra-Kumasi-Paga rail line connections and the rehabilitation of the Western and Eastern Rail Lines, and

iv. manage and use the revenue from the Jubilee, as well as from the TEN and SANKOFA fields, in a responsible and transparent manner.

Chapter 4
AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Agriculture continues to be the anchor of the country’s economy, employing more than half of our workforce. Growth in this sector has declined dramatically under the NDC’s mismanagement, incompetence and corruption. Food is unnecessarily expensive in a country that is blessed with fertile land. Our production methods are not modern and income levels of farmers and fisherfolk remain low, thus making the sector unattractive for the youth as a sustainable means of livelihood.
Our vision for the next four years is to modernize agriculture, improve production efficiency, achieve food security, and profitability for our farmers, all aimed at significantly increasing agricultural productivity.
The NPP will pursue a value-addition strategy, aimed at rapidly ramping up agro-processing and developing new and stable markets for our
products.
Our policies and interventions will ensure that our farmers and fisherfolk earn higher incomes. Our reforms will encompass the full agricultural value chain and create additional businesses and job opportunities in the areas of storage, transport, processing, packaging and marketing of
agricultural produce.
District Assemblies and Traditional Authorities will be assigned specific roles in agricultural development and the NPP will adopt policies specifically targeted at supporting women in agriculture.

I. IMPROVING PRODUCTION EFFICIENCY

In pursuing improvements in production efficiency, the NPP will do the following:

a. Improved Seeds and Fertilizers

* ensure that farming inputs are readily available within farming communities at affordable prices

* support private certified seed growers to increase substantially the supply of improved seeds to farmers

* increase subsidies on retail prices of seeds, fertilizers and other agrochemicals, and
* tap into our gas and petroleum resources, to produce locally fertilisers for the industry to improve agricultural yield and save foreign exchange.

b. Irrigation Development

The NPP Government undertook and completed feasibility studies for irrigating the Accra Plains, Afram Plains, and the Northern Savannah. Over the last eight years, however, the lands in the Accra Plains have been largely lost to encroachment due to deliberate inaction by the NDC
Government. The NPP will reactivate the plans for the remaining areas, to mitigate crop failures related to inadequate rainfall, and also to facilitate year-round farming by:

* as a matter of urgency, rehabilitating existing public irrigation schemes, including the abandoned Vea Irrigation Scheme

* focusing on developing irrigation schemes in the Afram Plains and the Northern Savannah

* providing a mechanism to capture the water released by the annual spillage of the Bagre dam in Burkina to use for irrigation in the north. We will also begin immediate discussions with the
Government of Burkina Faso for a more controlled spillage of the dam to prevent the flooding that takes place, and

* facilitating the provision of community-owned and managed small-scale irrigation facilities across the country, especially in northern Ghana, through the policy of "One Village, One Dam".

c. Extension Services

Extension services to farmers have been cut back severely under the Mahama-led NDC government. Today, one extension officer is responsible for over 3,000 farmers. The NPP will work to achieve the UN-recommended ratio of one extension officer to 500 farmers, with emphasis on recruiting female extension officers.

d. Research

The NPP will revive the research programmes of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), as well as of the agricultural and related sciences departments of our public Universities and other institutions. Furthermore, the NPP will promote, and provide incentives for research into the utilization of remote sensing and satellite imaging technologies to map soil properties nationwide, to enable us match them to specific agricultural produce and cultivation strategies, as well as to enable us determine the appropriate blend of fertilizers for our soils, matching them with appropriate crops for improved yields and efficiency.

e. Mechanization

We intend to pursue a policy of mechanisation in the production of agricultural produce. Currently, there are about 85 mechanisation centres across the country, which are not functioning. We will revamp the existing centres and support the private sector to establish, manage, and provide affordable mechanisation services to farmers.
The NPP will also facilitate the supply of power tillers and other appropriate technologies for smallholder operations.

f. Commercial and Block farming

There is a need to promote and accelerate commercial large scale farming. The NPP will start with investing resources into block farming initiatives. Commercial and block farming introduce economies of scale which are necessary for the efficient use of machinery and support infrastructure.
In this direction, Government-facilitated block farming will be properly implemented, devoid of the cronyism and political interference that have turned the NDC’s implementation of this largely proven farming technique into a complete failure.

The NPP will:

a. provide a framework within which smallholder farmers, irrespective of political persuasion, can be aggregated to take advantage of economies of scale, and

b. provide incentives, including land banks for strategic investors, for the establishment of large scale commercial farms, particularly in the Northern Savannah and the Afram Plains. Each of the commercial farms will have an outgrower component to benefit smallholding farmers in the locality.

II. DEVELOPMENT OF PRODUCTS

In modernising our agricultural sector, the NPP government aims at ensuring food security as well as producing quality raw materials for industry. The NPP will pay special attention to selected products for accelerated development, including grains, fruits, vegetables, tubers, oil palm, cotton, shea, cashew, cocoa, horticulture, livestock, fisheries and poultry.

a. Crop Production

* Grains: Our targeted grains will be maize, millet, sorghum, rice and soya beans. We plan a rapid expansion in the production of grains, particularly maize and soya beans, to support both
human consumption and the domestic poultry industry.

* Cassava: We intend to encourage the farming of cassava on a large scale for commercial and industrial purposes.

* Oil Palm, Cashew, Cotton and Shea: To facilitate the provision of technical support and finance, the NPP will help organize producers of these crops into producers’ associations. In
particular, the NPP will pursue value addition to these products as the core strategy of an agriprocessing and agribusiness
development plan and help promote them.

* Horticultural Crops: The NPP will promote production, based on commercial farms with outgrowers, to support exports.

* Cocoa: NPP’s objective over the next four years is to restore production to over one million metric tonnes per annum. The NPP will, therefore, redesign the following policies, and position them
as farmer-owned and managed programmes:

- reactivate and expand the mass spraying and Hi-tech programmes

- replant old cocoa farms with high-yielding and disease-resistant plants

- we recognise the suffering many farmers have undergone due to the NDC Government’s failure to compensate farmers who lose their trees to the swollen shoot disease. The NPP will reintroduce compensation payments under the cocoa disease control programme

- ensure that farmers receive increased producer prices plus bonuses high enough to encourage them to produce more cocoa for export

- ensure that the value that farmers receive for their produce is not diluted by depreciation of the cedi against the dollar

- facilitate access to farmlands for youth in cocoa producing areas

- set up special schemes to attract youth into cocoa farming

- strengthen and expand local cocoa processing, and

- intensify the search for new markets for our processed cocoa products

b. Livestock, Fisheries, and Poultry

To ensure that the population has a sustainable source of protein, NPP plans to develop through the following measures a vibrant livestock  industry in addition to fisheries, while resuscitating the collapsed poultry industry.

The NPP will:

* Livestock

- aggressively promote cattle ranching and will provide incentives to the private sector to develop cattle ranches

- in collaboration with the private sector, the NPP will facilitate the establishment of Livestock Development Centres in the three agro-climatic zones to promote the production of cattle and small ruminants like sheep and goats

- facilitate land acquisition for cattle ranching by the private sector

- support our relevant tertiary institutions to train more veterinary doctors and staff, and

- enact and enforce laws to limit cattle grazing to fenced-in areas designated as fodder/grazing banks for cattle.

* Fisheries
The NPP will implement the following policies for a sustainable and modernised fishing industry:

- ensure availability as well as the effective and transparent distribution of pre-mix fuel to fisherfolk

- eliminate import duties for fishing equipment like nets and outboard motors

- enforce the fisheries management policies, such as those embodied in the Fisheries Act, 2002 (Act 625), including on pair trawling and other illegal and unapproved fishing methods

- protect our fishing stocks by providing patrol boats to stop foreign fishing vessels

- continue with the programme of building landing sites and storage facilities, at places such as Cape Coast, Mumford, Teshie, Axim, Keta, Ada, Jamestown, and Winneba

- restore the Korle Lagoon, including the reintroduction of its fish stocks

- in collaboration with the private sector, accelerate aquaculture by promoting extensive fish farming throughout the country

- in collaboration with the private sector, the NPP will develop inland fishing across the country by developing related infrastructure

- place local fisherfolk directly in charge of subsidised inputs through local, designated outlets, and

- under our industrialisation policy, promote the local production of fishing nets and other inputs.

* Poultry

The poultry industry has virtually collapsed. The main challenges are high cost of poultry feed, due to dependence on importation of key ingredients, such as soya bean and cake, and also the high cost of locally-produced maize.

Addressing these challenges requires a holistic approach and key NPP policies will evolve around:

- supporting the private sector to expand local production of poultry feed and veterinary products

- supporting efficient production of both maize and soya beans

- facilitating access to credit by the industry

- encouraging local poultry meat processing, and

- instituting anti-dumping measures on poultry

III. STORAGE, PROCESSING AND TRANSPORT

The NPP will support selected products beyond the farm gate to incorporate post-harvest activities, including storage, transportation, processing, packaging and distribution by:

a. providing incentives to the private sector and District Assemblies to invest in post-harvest activities, including the building of pack houses and storage facilities both on farms and in locations close to production centres

b. supporting small and medium scale agro-processing enterprises, particularly women-owned, to acquire the appropriate technology and basic processing machinery, and

c. continuing to expand and upgrade the road infrastructure connecting farming communities to marketing centres.

IV. MARKETING

A major focus of the NPP administration will be to ensure that food producers can be guaranteed buyers and can obtain fair and attractive prices for their products.

In this respect, an NPP government will:

a. expedite the full implementation of an active Commodity Exchange

b. use its purchasing power to create demand for locally-produced food items by ensuring that all foods purchased with government funds, for example under the School Feeding Programme, are
locally produced

c. endeavour not only to expand existing, but also open up new domestic and export markets

d. develop market support services for selected horticulture, food and industrial crops to enhance production for export

e. facilitate and support the establishment of stakeholder-controlled marketing companies for grains and selected products, including a Cashew Marketing Authority, and

f. revive the Grains Development Board

Chapter 5
GROWING TOGETHER:
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM
RE-ORIENTING CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
TO RURAL COMMUNITIES, INNER
CITIES, COASTAL/FISHING, AND
ZONGO COMMUNITIES

The challenges of development and poverty in the country should not be a matter of geographical location. Around the country, there are millions who face poverty and deprivation daily, and who need urgent, deliberate and forceful intervention from the state to improve their lives and their circumstances.
An NPP government, between 2017 and 2020, will aggressively pursue policies that will be targeted at particular segments of our population who continue to be excluded, and who miss out on the myriad of opportunities that abound not only in the country, but also in today’s globalised world.

Growing Together consists of seven major economic initiatives, designed to take giant leaps in transforming Ghana holistically, with particular emphasis on rural and deprived communities, in a major effort at inclusive development of all parts of the country, by adopting a localised development approach.

They are:

a. the Infrastructure for Poverty Eradication Programme (IPEP)

b. the restructuring of the Savannah Accelerated Development Authority (SADA) to the original design and mandate of the Northern Development Authority (NDA)

c. the establishment of a Middle Belt Development Authority (MBA)

d. the establishment of a Coastal Development Authority (CDA)

e. the establishment of a Zongo Development Fund

f. the creation of a new, "Western North" Administrative Region, and

g. the restructuring of the Royalty Sharing Ratios with Mining Communities to increase the share of revenues that mining communities currently receive in royalty payments.

I. INFRASTRUCTURE FOR POVERTY ERADICATION PROGRAMME (IPEP)

The NPP will reorient the national capital expenditure budget to place a focus on local constituency-specific needs. In this vein, an amount of the equivalent of $275 million will be reallocated from our existing capital expenditure budget to the IPEP, a bold project at providing
local solutions to local problems. IPEP will enable capital expenditure (including equipment) at the local level to be met, in order to accelerate specific local growth goals. Every constituency in the country will be allocated the equivalent of $1 Million annually to finance capital expenditure on upgrading and improving infrastructure, and/or on developing new facilities especially in rural and deprived communities.
It is envisaged, as part of their core mandate, that the three Development Authorities - Northern, Middle Belt, and Coastal - will be the primary executing agencies under the IPEP.
The Development Authorities will report directly to the Office of the President, which will ensure accountability in their operations.

II. NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (NDA)

The NDC, in 2008, promised to take immediate and urgent steps to bridge the development gap between Northern and Southern Ghana through the setting up of a Savannah Accelerated Development Authority (SADA) to be directly under the president, with a vision and mandate to accelerate the socio-economic development of the savannah belt of northern Ghana. They promised to establish a Special Development Fund for SADA and pledged an initial start-up contribution to this fund of GH¢200 million, with additional annual contributions from Government of GH¢100 million each year for 20 years.
The NDC also promised that once SADA was established, the Government will lead a Donor Conference on northern Ghana, with the aim to raising an additional $200 million from the country’s Development Partners and the private sector, in order to assure the new Authority a firm and financially solid foundation.
Per the manifesto promise of the NDC, SADA should have had at least a billion cedis allocated from Government to it by now, in addition to other funds that were to be sourced from Development Partners and the private sector.

Actual Picture

However, according to the 2012 manifesto of the NDC, GH¢260 million Ghana cedis had been allocated to SADA by 2012. In the 2013 and 2014 Budgets, GH¢20 million Ghana cedis was allocated to SADA per year, while there was no mention of SADA in 2015 and 2016 Budgets. This means that a total of only GHc300 million has been allocated to
the SADA programme as at 2016, compared to the promised one billion Ghana cedis. Not only has the Mahama-led NDC government refused to make resources available to SADA, they have also supervised and led the thievery of the GHc300 million allocated to SADA. The GHc300 million was entirely pilfered into private pockets. Since 2012, SADA has not received funds from government for any capital project. This situation contravenes the Savannah Accelerated
Development Act, 2010 (Act 805), which enjoins government to make annual budgetary allocations to SADA.
Also, seven years after the passage of the SADA law, the provision that stipulates that parts of taxes on non-petroleum imports will be allocated
to help ensure sustainable SADA funding is yet to be implemented.
Seven years after the implementation of SADA, the development of northern Ghana has stalled and may actually be on a backward slide. What is crystal clear is that seven years after the implementation of SADA, poverty levels are still stubbornly high in northern Ghana.

According to the 2013 Ghana Living Standards Survey, more than four in every ten persons are poor in Upper East Region (44.4%), increasing to one in every two in the Northern Region (50.45%) and seven out of every ten in Upper West (70.7%). In terms of extreme poverty incidence, the three northern regions continue to have a higher rate of extreme poverty than the national average, and also than all the other coastal and forest regions who have rates lower than the national average. Upper West region has the highest extreme poverty incidence of 45.1 per cent, followed by Northern (22.8%) and Upper East (21.3%).

The tree planting and guinea fowl projects implemented by SADA, in June 2012, cost the nation GH¢33million and GH¢15 million respectively, with those contracts being terminated midway as a result of public
uproar. President Mahama, in January 2014, ordered the discontinuation of these contracts long after the whole contract amounts had been paid out in 2013 to the consultants.

From the foregoing, it is easy to draw the conclusion that there is simply
very little commitment to SADA by the NDC, beyond the usual rhetoric and corruption.

What The NPP Will Do

The NPP will restructure SADA, transform it into a more focused Northern Development Authority (NDA) as originally envisaged and make it a flagship programme for the economic transformation of the three northern regions. There will be presidential-led support for genuine entrepreneurship development in northern Ghana. Industrialists, entrepreneurs, manufacturers, food processors and marketers, crop, livestock and fish farmers and artisans in northern Ghana will witness a new dawn of public support for meaningful economic transformation in northern Ghana.

The implementation of the structural transformation of the economy of northern Ghana will hang on strategies that will include the following:

a. a transformed agriculture sector in northern Ghana that provides the critical linkage between agriculture and industry

b. accelerated provision of irrigation infrastructure, enhanced access to credit and inputs for agriculture, processing and export

c. improved access to mechanized agriculture, with modernized extension services and accelerated infrastructure provision for livestock and aquaculture

d. interventions in agriculture, complemented by appropriate interventions in the trade and industrial sectors in northern Ghana

e. integrated approach to rural development. This will involve the provision of agricultural investments, together with basic infrastructure like potable water, sanitation, electricity, road network, schools, health facilities, low cost housing, and small and medium scale industries among others in farming communities

f. special incentives for investors to locate agricultural processing factories within the farming communities

g. support for the retention of water for irrigation and dry season farming through a policy of "One Village, One Dam" to provide
"dams" to all villages

h. ensure the development of a healthy, knowledgeable, well-trained and disciplined labour force with the capacity to drive and sustain private sector-led growth in northern Ghana. The broad areas of intervention here will include education especially in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM), health, safe water and environmental sanitation, urban housing and slum upgrading

i. work with the private sector to establish agro-processing industries and manufacturing/assembly plants to provide sustainable jobs for the unemployed youth of the northern regions

j. provide incentives for private investors for the sustainable exploration of minerals in the three northern regions, and

k. pursue an employment-centred economic growth and development strategy.

III. THE MIDDLE BELT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY(MBA)

Like the other authorities under "Growing Together", the Middle Belt Development Authority (MBA) will serve as the main development agency for the middle belt of the country, in particular, covering Northern Volta, the proposed "Western North Region", Ashanti Region, Eastern Region, and the Brong Ahafo Region. The MBA will administer the IPEP in these areas.

IV. THE COASTAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (CDA)

The Coastal Development Authority (CDA) will serve as the principal development agency for the coastal communities of the country, covering
the coastal areas of Volta and the Western Regions, and the Greater Accra and Central Regions. Again, the CDA will administer the IPEP in these areas.

V. ZONGO DEVELOPMENT FUND (ZDF)

This fund is designed to help develop Zongos. Residents in the mostly densely-populated Zongos have peculiar infrastructure deficits, social services deficit, and poor sanitation management, which require special attention. Over the years, these communities have been 'left behind' in development planning. Residents and their needs have been poorly identified, leading to inadequate and sometimes inappropriate interventions in the provision of social services and physical infrastructures.

The NPP Zongo policy is aimed at developing these communities in order to unleash their potentials to become centres of opportunity.

In this direction, we will establish the Zongo Development Fund (ZDF) to invest in:

a. education and training within the Zongos

b. improved infrastructure in the Zongos targeting health and sanitation

c. supporting local businesses and centres of culture and arts, and

d. community policing and security.

VI. CREATION OF A NEW "WESTERN NORTH" ADMINISTRATIVE REGION

Following the relevant constitutional procedures, NPP proposes to create a "Western North" region out of the existing Western Region in order to open it up for accelerated development. The northern part of the Western Region is resource-rich, but has not, like most parts of the nation, fully reached its economic potential. There is a strong economic case for creating a "Western North Region". The
combined contribution of the two regions, each focusing on its core potential, for example, the South, part of the present day Western Region, in industry, shipping, oil and gas, and the new Western North in minerals, agro-processing and forestry products, will impact positively on the national GDP. Locally they will help in creating new jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities for the youth of these regions. In addition, the creation of the region will enhance administrative efficiency, as well as service delivery. The NPP will, therefore, facilitate its establishment.

VII. INCREASED SHARE OF MINING ROYALTIES

With regard to mineral royalties, the NPP’s policy is to ensure that mining communities receive a higher share. Currently, 80% of the royalty goes to Government, 10% to the Minerals Commission, and 10% to the community. The NPP will reduce Government share to 70%, while doubling the community share to 20%. The additional 10% to the community will be
given to the District Assemblies to be used specifically for developing infrastructure in the mining communities. This will ensure more value is retained in mining communities for
development.

Together, the seven programmes under Growing Together will be directed at implementing key decentralised action plans, to realise the enormous resources available in every part of the country – human, natural, technological, and financial. This will help boost pivotal sectors in the various zones and develop the much needed infrastructure aimed at stimulating growth, creating jobs, and improving the lives and opportunities of life in these areas, as well as helping create viable local economies.

Chapter 6
INFRASTRUCTURE

NPP will embark on a sustainable and integrated infrastructural development programme across the country. The integrated programme will address infrastructure that supports a modern road network, housing, water systems, aviation, ICT, ports, harbours, and railways. The NPP will ensure the best value for money and meaningful local participation in ICT at all levels. The programme will focus on reducing the cost of transportation, while decreasing the time it takes to move goods, food items and people from one location to another. We will create jobs and prosperity through our Integrated Infrastructure Development Programme.

I. MASSIVE CORRUPTION, THE HALLMARK OF INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT UNDER MAHAMA

Infrastructure development under the Mahama-led NDC government has been characterised by massive corruption through contract overpricing, opaque and shady contracting processes, and gross abuse of the sole sourcing provisions of the Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663).
As a result, while the country’s debt stock has ballooned precariously due to the reckless borrowing of the Mahama-led NDC government ostensibly for the purpose of developing the nation's infrastructure, expenditure on infrastructure has declined considerably from an average of 11.5% of GDP between 2001 and 2008 to 5.7% of GDP between 2009 and 2015. The 2016 expenditure on infrastructure is even lower at 4.2% of GDP. The cost of all the infrastructure expenditure undertaken, by the Mahama-led NDC government from loans, grants and taxes between 2009 and 2015, is approximately $7 billion. Meanwhile, the government has borrowed the equivalent of, at the time of borrowing, $39 billion, which, according to Government, is US$26 billion on the basis of the current book value. Nevertheless, the critical question still arises: where is the rest of the money?

Indeed, according to the Managing Director of the IMF, most of Ghana's borrowing has been used for consumption, and not for investment. Overpricing of contracts, corruption and the absence of value for money considerations are largely responsible for this.

Among the many examples of the acts of corruption under the Mahama-led NDC government are the following:

a. of two identical sets of teachers’ bungalows, standing side by side, in Dambai Teacher Training College, the one constructed by
the NPP in 2007 cost GH¢195,000 and that by the NDC in 2011 costed 4.6 times more at GH¢900,000

b. a runway rehabilitation at the Kumasi airport by the Mahama-led NDC government cost US$23.8 million, whereas the same government proposes to build a brand new airport in Ho at about the same cost, estimated at $25 million. Comparatively, Ethiopia is building its brand new Shire Airport at a cost of $21 million.

c. in the AMERI Power deal, Ghana is paying US$510 million for 10 gas power plants, which could have been acquired directly from General Electric (GE) for US$220 million. Overpricing of contracts, through the use of sole sourcing, is a corrupt procurement method of choice very typical of the Mahama-led NDC government. Egypt, for example, is constructing a 1800MW gas power plant at a cost of $1.3 billion. Abu Dhabi is constructing a 1600MW gas power plant at a cost of $1.5 billion. Together, the AMERI and KARPOWER deals will cost Ghana over $2 billion over five years, and yet will give us a mere 505MW

d. an amount of GH¢3.65 million, almost US$1 million, earmarked for railway development from oil funds, was in fact used for the rebranding of 116 Metro Mass Rapid Transit buses. It turns out that the actual cost of the work done, executed by a third party, was GH¢11,600, and

e. the University of Ghana acquired a loan facility of US$217 Million from the Israeli Government to build a 600-bed teaching hospital. However, the cost of building the new 600-bed teaching hospital by the University of Ghana is $30m less than the cost of renovating and expanding the Ridge Hospital from a 200-bed to a 420-bed facility.

These are just a few examples of the corrupt nature of infrastructure development under the Mahama-led NDC government. Indeed, given the resources at its disposal, the nation should have received at least four to five times the quantum of investment that the NDC claims to have undertaken in terms of infrastructure development.

In addition to taking measures to curb the massive corruption in the infrastructure development Sector and to ensure that Ghana receives value-for-money on all such projects, the key component of our Integrated
Infrastructure Development Programme are:

a. the National Asset Protection Project

b. development of interconnected Roads, Railways, Ports & Harbours (RRHPs) Systems

c. development of an aviation hub for international & regional airlines

d. a Water For All Programme to ensure every Ghanaian has access to potable water

e. Food Control Interventions

f. mainstreaming ICT in governance & public service delivery, and

g. a quality, affordable Housing For All Strategy

II. NATIONAL ASSET PROTECTION PROJECT

It is a national scandal that successive governments have failed or unduly delayed in continuing and executing projects started by previous governments.

One of the major challenges in the efficient management of public finances, and in economic development is the inability or unwillingness of succeeding governments to complete projects started by predecessor governments. Consequently, billions of Ghana cedis are locked up in numerous uncompleted projects scattered around the country. The NPP will break with this tradition.

The NPP will establish a National Asset Protection Project to perform the following functions:

i. conduct a physical and financial audit to locate, identify and value each of these assets

ii. conduct a Social Impact, Economic Impact and Financial Viability Assessment of each of these assets with the view of completing those that meet set criteria, and

iii. establish a special-purpose Asset Securitization Vehicle to hold these assets, and leverage them to raise funds for their completion. This enables the state retain control over valuable assets, while still being able to release capital for development purposes.

In addition to the policy leading to the protection of national assets and safeguarding national wealth, it will also lead to three major benefits:

i. job creation - an army of student architects and draughtsmen, as well as property valuers and related professionals, will be deployed in all districts to conduct the audit and also be involved in completion of these projects

ii. value creation - Government will be able to access a vast pool of funds for completion of these projects and further development, and

iii. continuity of projects - continuity in development will be assured as funds will be available to continue projects started by predecessor governments.

III. ROADS, RAILWAYS, PORTS, AND HARBOURS (RRHPS)

The lack of a modern, integrated, and well-maintained transportation infrastructure is one of the weakest links in our development. As well as deficits in the quantum of Roads, Railways, Ports, and Harbours (RRPHs), the existing infrastructure is poorly maintained and integrated, which requires an expedited and focused attention, as we aim to grow rapidly this economy.

Between 2001 and 2008, the NPP extended the country’s road network by 80%. Unfortunately, for the period 2009 to 2016, the NDC has only been able to extend the road network by 6% at grossly inflated costs. There are still some missing links and major river crossing points that do not make the road network fully inter-connected. The proportion of the country’s road network in gravel and earth surface conditions remains high at about 77%.

Since its establishment in the early twentieth century by the colonial government, the railway network has also not seen any significant development. It is obsolete and wholly inadequate. The Ghana Railway Authority (GRA), which was subsequently established, is underresourced and incapable of fulfilling its mandate. Worse, funds meant for the development of the railway network were diverted towards the corrupt bus branding scandal.

Furthermore, West Africa lacks a clear maritime hub which provides an opportunity, with continuous improvement in our maritime sector, to make Ghana West Africa’s maritime hub. There is also a need to make the right kinds of investment to develop potential inland port sites. Sadly, road construction has been one of the areas in which corruption under the Mahama-led NDC government has become legendary. Inflated contract prices, sole sourcing and receipt of inducements for contracts by no less a person as the President of The Republic has resulted in roads with reduced lifespans, as well as accidents on our roads.

Using Public Private Partnerships (PPP) where appropriate, the NPP will undertake a massive investment in RRPHs infrastructure, in order to open up the economy for the flow of goods and people within the country, and for international and regional trade, leading to accelerated
development of all parts of the country.

a. NPP’s Policy on Roads, Railways, Ports, and Harbours (RRHPs)

The NPP will:

* instil discipline, transparency, and competitiveness in the construction of roads and development of railways, ports and harbours
* enhance the movement of goods and people while also aiming at increasing the quality of life of our citizens by reducing traffic congestion, the negative effect of dust pollution on their health
and road traffic accidents, and

* institute a robust maintenance scheme for our RRPHs infrastructure to maximise its lifetime value and returns for our economy

Cost Reduction Strategies

NPP will:

* adhere strictly to the provisions of the Procurement Law in order to reduce high project costs and obtain value for money in project
award and

* pass legislation for at least 20% of road contracts, awarded to foreign contractors, to be sub-contracted to local contractors

b. Roads

NPP will:

* expand and improve the road network, while closing the missing links in the network

* tar gravel roads, especially in areas of high agricultural production and tourism

* tar roads in District capitals and extend them to major towns within the district

* increase the network of public transportation system in collaboration with all stakeholders, and

* integrate the databases of DVLA, the Police and insurance companies in order to reduce time and cost of acquiring relevant documents and permits needed to register and operate vehicles.

c. Railways

NPP will, in collaboration with the private sector:

* develop a modern railway network with strong economic linkages. The Western and Eastern Lines will be completely overhauled. This will facilitate the haulage of bauxite, manganese, cocoa, cement, iron ore and other bulk commodities as well as the transportation of people. The rehabilitation of the Eastern Line, in particular, will also facilitate the operation of the Boankra Inland Port which has been rendered inoperable as a result of the nonfunctioning of the line. The activation of the Boankra Inland Port will lead to the creation of thousands of jobs.

* develop an integrated Light Rail Transit System for our major cities to connect main business districts with outlying residential
locations

* expand the railway network to the north of Ghana to create more economic opportunities and link the country with neighbouring countries. This will be done by extending the Eastern Rail Line from Kumasi to Paga, to create an Accra-Kumasi-Paga connection to facilitate haulage of goods from, and to the North, and the exploitation of iron ore and other mineral reserves in the North, and

* build a Tema-Akosombo Rail Link to tie in with a vibrant and revived Volta Lake transportation system to provide a major avenue for expanded transportation and the resulting economic
activity.

d. Ports and Harbours

NPP will:

* continue the expansion of the ports and fully automate the process for clearing goods and vehicles, leading to a reduction in port charges and fees

* continue the expansion and modernisation of the Tema and Takoradi harbours

* in collaboration with the private sector, expand the Takoradi Harbour to Sekondi. A logistics centre will be developed in Sekondi as part of expansion in order to boost economic activities in the locality and its environs

* in collaboration with the private sector, construct new harbours at Jamestown in Accra and in Keta

* in collaboration with the private sector, develop an inland port at Buipe

* strengthen the capacity of the Ghana Maritime Authority to enable it effectively play its regulatory role in the maritime industry

* in collaboration with the private sector, develop the Volta River into a major transportation artery by building modern ferry ports at such locations as Buipe, Yapei, Yeji, Makango, Kwadwokurom, Kete-Krachi, Adowso, Ekyeamanfrom, Akateng, and Boso

h. in collaboration with the private sector, increase the number of ferries on the Volta River.

These investments will also increase the volume of business from landlocked countries in the region.

e. Maintenance Scheme

NPP will:

* clear the huge backlog of road maintenance works, resulting from eight years of neglect by the NDC government

* subsequently ensure a timely maintenance of roads

* establish a timely and effective preventive maintenance plan for all public transportation vehicles, and

* strengthen the current axle load control on our road corridors to reduce the deterioration rate of our roads.

f. Increased Quality of Life

NPP will:

* tar roads leading to district and regional hospitals, in order to speed up access to health facilities in case of emergency

* promote research into local road construction materials to strengthen existing gravel pavements and dampen dust pollution

* reduce fatalities and injuries on our roads by:

- scaling up efforts in road safety programmes by amending the law to empower the National Road Safety Commission to enforce and sanction against road sector operators, who do not comply with the laws on road safety

- embarking on nationwide road sign and road marking placements, and

- reviewing location and lay-bys of fuel stations, in order to reduce accidents on our highways.

* reduce traffic congestion by:

- widening major arterial roads to multi-lane carriageways

- constructing lay-bys and dedicated traffic lanes for high occupancy buses

- building, in collaboration with the private sector, new entry points into major cities like Accra, Takoradi, Kumasi and Tamale, and

- constructing, in collaboration with the private sector, bypasses and interchanges at major intersections like Point 7, Tamale, the Tema Motorway Roundabout, the Suame Roundabout and Oforikrom Intersection in Kumasi, and the
Takoradi PTC Roundabout.

IV. AVIATION

The NPP will seek to make the country’s airports aviation hubs for international and regional airlines within West Africa by:

a. working with the private sector to offer modern, attractive air transport infrastructure, and

b. building capacity and establishing institutional and policy framework to enhance safety and security of air services

The domestic aviation industry is under severe stress. Air fares have gone up significantly, following the introduction of 17.5% VAT in 2015 on airline tickets, coupled with a new policy to force domestic airlines to purchase handling services at the Kotoka International Airport from either Menzes or Aviance. The relatively high cost of aviation fuel and the depreciation
of the cedi have also contributed to the decline in the sector.

Consequently, passenger numbers dropped from 718,725 in 2014 to 525,440 in 2015, a 36.8% fall. Since 2011, three out of five domestic airlines have ceased operations - Citylink, Fly540 and Antrak. Even the domestic airlines in current operation are doing so under severe constraints.

To address these challenges, the NPP will:

a. reduce the price of aviation fuel to match prices in the region to make our airports more competitive and domestic airlines viable

b. review the current baggage handling arrangements for domestic airlines

c. abolish the 17.5% VAT on domestic air fares, and

d. encourage and support local airlines and entrepreneurs to set up strong private airlines that can fully utilize all the nation's route
rights.

V. WATER INFRASTRUCTURE (WATER FOR ALL)

The NPP has a solid track record in the provision of water to several communities across the country. Between 2001 to 2008, the NPP undertook major water system improvements in Cape Coast, Baafikrom, Koforidua, Kumasi, Kwanyarku, Ada, Sogakope, Accra, and Tamale. Unfortunately, today, a large number of Ghanaians still do not have access to potable water. Many hospitals do not have access to clean water on tap to support their daily operations.

The NPP will integrate the management of water resources into our economic development activities in order to control properly their use. The goal of NPP’s Water For All agenda is to ensure that every Ghanaian has access to potable water.

The NPP will achieve this by:

a. sinking at least 25,000 new boreholes and an additional 300 small town water supply systems in the rural areas and small towns

b. supporting the construction of dams in rural areas

c. undertaking major water systems (treatment plants and associated distribution systems)

d. ensuring that the water sector gets the investment that it needs to upgrade antiquated urban and rural water systems

e. developing water projects to ensure constant supply of potable water to all district, regional, and teaching hospitals, as well as educational institutions

f. regulating small scale mining to protect our water bodies, and

g. managing refuse collection and disposal in such a way as to reduce pollution of our water bodies.

VI. TACKLING FLOODING

Perennial flooding in the country has led to regrettable loss of lives and property, as well as the spread of diseases, including cholera. As a first step, the NPP will construct storm drains in Accra and other cities and towns to deal with the recurrent, devastating floods. As a long-term, permanent solution, we will establish a National Hydrology Authority (NHA), which will be responsible for developing long-term solutions to flood control and the protection of our inland and sea coastlines.

The Authority shall plan, develop, maintain, protect and administer drainage, flood control measures, major dams and sea defence measures, including construction of major storm drains to reduce the risk of flooding, constant dredging and desilting of our water ways and drains to ensure the free flow of flood waters.

VII. INFORMATION COMMUNICATION AND TECHNOLOGY (ICT)

The NPP will put ICT, and especially data science, including analytics, at the centre of the national development agenda, and also as part of a strategy to position the country as a regional ICT hub.

NPP will achieve this by engaging in the following activities:

* National Identification Scheme - we will register every resident in Ghana within the first year of taking office

* Mainstream ICT in the public sector:

- NPP will establish an integrated Data Warehouse of databases from key public institutions, using the National Identification System as the unique identifier for data items, and

- automate the processes involved in accessing public services at both national and local government offices

* Improving telecommunications accessibility: NPP will facilitate nationwide access to mobile networks

* Create opportunities for entrepreneurship - we shall develop ICT Incubator Hubs in various regional capitals to create business opportunities in the private sector. We recognise the huge opportunities in investing in the nascent but active app and software development ecosystem in Ghana. We plan, through Government procurement processes, and as part of our efforts to digitize access to social and public services, to invest in growing start-ups in the area. We will invest, in partnership with the private sector, in world standard Incubator Hubs, including workspaces and app development resources, to support the sector

* Increase citizens' accessibility to data platforms by reducing tariffs on the use of data for internet access, and

* Work with the private sector to increase the broadband bandwidth and speed of connections nationwide.

VIII. HOUSING: QUALITY, AFFORDABLE HOUSING FOR ALL

NPP’s vision is to use an appropriate mix of public policy and public/private investments to deliver quality, affordable social housing and private housing solutions that meet the needs and financial capacity of the ordinary Ghanaian.

We recognise the dream of all Ghanaians to own a home, or failing that, at least to have decent rental accommodation. There are, however, three main constraints to housing Ghanaians which prevents many from buying, or being able to afford decent rental property.

These are:

a. a deficit which has created a backlog. The country’s housing deficit is over 1,700,000 units. In addition to this huge deficit,
it is estimated that over 50% of Ghanaians live in sub-standard houses, depressed inner city dwellings, uncompleted houses, shops, kiosks and other unsuitable structures

b. undersupply of annual requirements of housing units. Whilst current supply stands at about 35 to 40,000 units per annum, the actual need per annum is over 100,000 units, and

c. the high cost of buying or renting a home

The NPP’s approach to helping Ghanaians meet their aspirations is to adopt a novel way to the construction of homes, and instituting creative financing schemes. Our overall aims are to:

i. improve overall affordability and access to decent homes for all working Ghanaians and their families in modern communities

ii. develop housing units targeted at the vulnerable and marginalized in society

iii. develop financing schemes to assist home buyers to acquire units

iv. improve the quality of infrastructure in existing communities, and

v. use public policy to develop the entire housing value-chain.

To provide a solution to the supply-side constraints, and also financing the demand-side, the NPP will:

a. facilitate the construction of high-density, quality social, low, and mid-income housing over the short, medium and long term by:

* establishing land banks with infrastructure such as roads, drainage, water and power in place for the development of affordable housing units on a public-private partnership (PPP)
basis

* offering tax incentives to local real estate developers and suppliers of building materials

* abolishing the 5% VAT on real estate sales

* working with identifiable groups such as the Trades Union Congress (TUC), Ghana National Association of Teachers (GNAT), National Association of Graduate Teachers(NAGRAT), Farmer’s Groups and other trade groups to facilitate the construction of homes for their members through the provision of the appropriate financing guarantees

* implementing a national policy requiring every public building, including new homes built under all PPP arrangements, to install solar panels and water-harvesting technologies in order to reduce the long term cost of ownership

* promoting and developing the use of local building materials in the construction of homes, and

b. fully implement section 103 (assignment of pension benefits for housing of workers) of the National Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766)

c. facilitate also the development of an active mortgage market to expand mortgage loans to Ghanaians.

Chapter 7
NATURAL RESOURCES – LAND, FORESTRY AND MINING
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Introduction

The country is richly endowed with natural resources like fertle lands, lakes, rivers, forests, wildlife, fish and minerals which are vital for her development. However, Ghana’s natural resources, upon which so much of the country’s economic activity and the population’s livelihood depend, are being depleted at an alarming rate. More than 50 percent of the original forest cover has been converted to agricultural land by clearing for perennial or annual cropping.

The NPP policy on forestry resources will seek to rehabilitate degraded forest reserve areas through planting of fast-growing indigenous and exotic species, conservation and sustainable use of natural resources.

I. REFORESTATION

a. Restoration of degraded areas and plantation
establishment

The NPP will target annually 30,000 hectares (ha) of degraded areas within and outside forest reserves for reforestation and plantation development, using fast growing indigenous and exotic species.

We will develop and support small scale community tree nurseries by:

i. establishing tree and plantain suckers in a minimum of 800 communities - averagely 4 communities per district - throughout the country to supply the seedlings for national reforestation and plantation development programmes, and

ii. procuring all seedlings for national plantation development programme and other reforestation efforts from these communities to generate income and create jobs.

b. Bamboo and Rattan plantations development

Bamboo and rattan resources in the country constitute the two largest non-timber forest products that have been identified to be suitable substitutes for timber. Currently, rattan is extensively used in the furniture and handicraft industry, while bamboo is mainly used for construction. It is projected that 50,000 hectares of these plantations would be required to augment the supplies from natural stands over the next 25 years.

The NPP will support the annual establishment of 1,000 hectares of bamboo and rattan plantations and will encourage, individuals and private sector involvement through the provision of subsidized planting materials.

c. Support conservation of biodiversity and priority ecosystems

To facilitate the conservation of our rich biodiversity, the NPP will:

i. extend forestry conservation areas

ii. re-survey and demarcate forests with permanent concrete pillars, and

iii. support the protection of the remaining network of natural forest and biodiversity hotspots in the country, to serve as gene banks for indigenous species and refuge areas for threatened, endemic and rare species.

d. Launch an Apiculture Forest Conservation Programme

Bee-hives will be made available to forest fringe communities, in the next four years, as a forest protection mechanism and job creation incentive.

e. Ecotourism

The NPP will support the enhancement of the ecotourism industry in the country to boost further its potential and contribution to economic
development.

f. Promote sustainable water resource management

Water is a dwindling resource and the threat of water scarcity looms large. Trends indicate that Ghana would be a 'water stressed' state by 2025, with a potential supply gap of 50%. The NPP will address this threat through a comprehensive protection of water catchment areas, the principal mechanism being the Clean Rivers Programme (CRP), which will be executed across the country with the participation of voluntary
organisations.

The goal of this programme is to maintain and improve the quality of water resources within each river basin through an ongoing partnership with water stakeholders, local government, businesses and citizens.

The NPP will promote:

* replanting of trees along the banks of all major water bodies and their tributaries, to reduce silting and other negative human activities adjacent to river banks

* dry season gardening within the buffer zone, to protect river banks

* construction of canals and/or the use of water pumping equipment to transport water to the farms to ensure efficient water use

* procurement and supply to farmers of high quality seeds

* improved crop rotation and integrated nutrient and pest management, and

* the conduct of regular assessments of effluents into our river bodies with the view to controlling pollution

II. LAND

Several years of reform under the Land Administration Project (LAP) have still not led to an efficient and well-functioning regime of titling, fixing of boundaries and ownership tracing. Further reform is needed, especially under NPP’s plan to use growth in activity in the housing sector as a fulcrum for job creation.

In this direction, the NPP will:

a. speed up land services and enhance the accuracy of land certificates and records by investing in turning the Lands Commission into a true digital organization, to reduce the need for clerical or administrative paper shuffling and to free professional staff to focus on technical, policy and strategic land administration issues, where required. This will also ensure high standard of land data security

b. commit to ensuring that turnaround time for land registration is reduced to 30 working days

c. fully decentralize Lands Commission and land services to the district level. The NPP will reduce the cost of land services, by making such services accessible electronically and at the district levels

d. attract the widest variety of new industrial enterprises to the areas where it is most needed. We will reserve, zone and service lands at
strategic locations for the development of industrial and business parks and enclaves across the country in the right places, without
damaging our green belt. They will be provided with integrated infrastructure, solar power systems and high speed broadband services. This will be allocated to priority export oriented, import substitution industries, light industries, technology companies and sales outlets to reduce their cost of connecting to utilities, as well as their operational cost.

e. support such businesses, by making such lands available at a considerably reduced cost to businesses that justify it

f. release publicly held lands for productive uses. The NPP will free up surplus and underutilized lands, held by public departments for housing and commercial developments, to boost economic development and reduce the housing deficit.

III. MINERAL RESOURCES

The NPP will be environmentally conscious in granting mining leases in order to ensure protection of our environment and its biodiversity, by pursuing the following policies:

a. ensuring that mineral revenues are efficiently managed for the benefit of Ghanaians. The NPP will enact a consolidated Mineral Revenue Management Law, similar to the Petroleum Revenue Management Act 2011 (Act 815), to guide the use of mineral revenues in strategic sectors of our economy

b. mainstreaming critical strategic mineral feedstock into the domestic economy, including low value minerals, to support economic value addition

c. facilitating the revival of Anglo-gold Ashanti’s Obuasi mines and other mines as part of an overall strategy of protecting the jobs and livelihoods of mining communities

d. supporting local mining capability, by introducing institutional arrangements that promote coherence between mining policies and Science Technology and Innovation (STI) programmes

e. encouraging the development of shared infrastructure to integrate mining with community development

f. promoting mining value-addition through the processing of minerals

g. ensuring a positive socio-economic impact of mining on local communities, through appropriate interventions for community development

h. increasing transparency in the allocation of mineral rights and the utilization of mineral revenues at national and community levels

i. ensuring that mining and logging activities are undertaken in an environmentally sustainable manner

j. ensuring that land restoration is undertaken after mining operations come to an end, and

k. fully decentralising the Minerals Commission by establishing additional district offices of the Commission, where appropriate.

IV. SMALL-SCALE MINING

It is NPP’s view that the artisanal, small-scale mining sub-sector needs restructuring so that its activities can take place within guidelines set up under the appropriate regulations.
This will enable small scale miners to work and earn their livelihoods in a regulated, secure, and lawful environment. By this process, the environment, especially our water bodies, can be
protected and degraded land can be reclaimed through tree-planting and reforestation.

Chapter 8
SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION AND ENVIRONMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The modern world economy is knowledge-based and technology-driven. Today, the management of energy, agriculture, medicine and health, clean air, potable water, transportation, sanitation and the conservation of natural resources is an example of sectors whose solutions are based on science and information technology. For the country to make strides in its development, science, technology and innovation must be essential elements in all aspects of the national development process.

Science and technology contributes less than 1% of Ghana’s GDP, compared to an average of 2.5% in the rest of Africa. It is the NPP’s intention to achieve at least 1.5% over the next four years.
We are committed to promoting and leveraging the efforts of the scientific community to help transform the economy into a production-based one.

To realise this, we will undertake the initiatives listed under each of the broad sectors of science and technology:

I. GOVERNANCE

The NPP intends to establish a Presidential Advisory Council for Science and Technology (PACST). The Council will be an advisory group of the nation’s leading scientists and engineers, who directly advise the President on all matters and policies regarding science, technology and innovation, and who will also provide leadership in the propagation of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) in our education system.

II. NPP WILL STIMULATE DEMAND FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

The NPP will:

a. establish a merit-based research system to encourage scientific research for priority sectors of the economy

b. strengthen collaboration between industry, universities, and research centres to promote the commercialization of scientific research outputs

c. stimulate the demand for science and technology from the private sector

d. expand the research and development capabilities of the country through the establishment of Regional Technology Parks, and

e. in collaboration with the private sector and international financial institutions, establish a flagship system of Ghana Centres
of Excellence (GCEs) across the country that networks all Higher Education Institutes (HEIs), including all other research organizations such as Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)’s institutes and Cocoa Research Institute of Ghana (CRIG).

The GCEs will cover themes such as:

* biomedical engineering

* pharmaceutical technology and bioequivalence research

* crop improvements and seed technology

* environment and sanitation engineering

* energy engineering

* manufacturing equipment engineering

* agricultural technology

* food process engineering

* building technology, and

* electronics and electronic assembly,

At least 3 GCEs would be established by the end of 2020.

III. EDUCATION

The NPP will:

a. support the national policy of achieving 60:40 student ratio for the Sciences as compared to the Humanities by expanding STEM
scholarship schemes, and

b. provide incentives and support for accredited private tertiary institutions to establish schools and faculties of science and
technology.

IV. ENERGY

The NPP will explore the use of various renewable energy alternatives, e.g. solar, wind, tidal waves and biomass, including biogas, wood gasification and biodiesel.

V. WASTE MANAGEMENT

The NPP will:

a. employ science & technology to identify the most economic and efficient ways to recycle urban waste, and

b. build power plants that will use combustible domestic and industrial waste to generate electricity.

VI. AGRICULTURE AND LAND-USE

The NPP will:

a. employ science and technology to map out the soil structure and composition of the country. With this data, the country can increase agricultural production by using the right mix of seeds and fertilizer at the right locations

b. work with the scientific community to identify optimal use of agrochemicals, in order to reverse and/or reduce their negative effects on land, water bodies, food and health of our citizens, and

c. continue research and development to enhance land-use systems, including water management techniques, sustainable forestry techniques and improved sanitation systems.

VII. WATER

The NPP will facilitate research and development in technologies for water desalination.

VIII. ENVIRONMENT

The NPP will:

i. update and strengthen the many policies and programmes set up to manage the environment, especially the National Environmental Protection Programme (NEPP) and the Environmental Action Plan (EAP), and

ii. work, with its international partners to access, in a more effective manner, the $30 billion global fund available for climate change purposes.

Chapter 9
EDUCATION
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. OUR VISION

Education is critical in the building of the cohesive and prosperous Ghana on which we have set our eyes. Our children, and young people, must be equipped with the knowledge, skills, and aptitudes that would enable them compete with the best in the world. Every country that has made rapid, and significant progress has placed education at the heart of its development.

Today the education sector in our country is in a sad state. Teachers who should be at the heart of the provision of education are deeply demoralized and feel unappreciated. The payment of salaries and the processing of their promotions and annual increments are always in
arrears. Examination malpractices have sadly become regular features of life in our country leading to the undermining and loss of confidence in academic qualifications from our institutions.

We aim to shift the structure and content of our education system from merely passing examinations to building character, nurturing values, and raising literate, confident, and engaged citizens who can think critically. When Nana Akufo-Addo announced the commitment of the NPP to the delivery of free education for senior high schools, the NDC promptly denounced it as impractical. As the import of the proposal, however, began to dawn on them, they began to back track and through massive propaganda created the impression to the people that they too were committed to free education step by step. But, as the evidence of the past four years clearly shows, the commitment has only been skin-deep. Parents still face massive fees for the education of their children. In spite of the burdens on parents and guardians, our schools are starved of the basic tools and equipment needed for teaching. Anything from simple common things like chalk to text books and laboratory equipment and computers have been in short supply. On top of all this has been the most sustained evidence of contempt by a government towards the teaching profession. Teachers at all levels, from the primary to the Universities, have been subjected to such denigration and contempt that morale has sunk to the lowest ebb in the nation’s history. It is no wonder, therefore, that even at a time of the highest unemployment level in history, schools are still finding difficulty keeping their dedicated teachers. And it is no wonder that questions are being raised about the quality of education in Ghana today.

The NPP believes that all the hopes of Ghanaians for a bright future will come to naught unless the country is able to resolve its education crisis. That is why the NPP declares Education to be a MAJOR PRIORITY and commits itself to a BOLD, CREATIVE and VISIONARY and ALL-EMBRACING
PROGRAM for the TRANSFORMATION OF EDUCATION
IN GHANA.

The core elements of the Program shall be:

a. free education for all Ghanaian children up to senior high school, to ease the burden on parents and guardians while encouraging them to assume their responsibility for the social upbringing and parental control of their children

b. raise the quality of education at primary and senior high school level, with emphasis on science and mathematics as the fundamental building blocks for success in this age of technology and to ensure that the first and second cycle schools lay the solid foundations needed either for tertiary education or for preparations for early entry into the work place

c. work with Universities to raise their standards to the ranks of the best among their peers in Africa and beyond to ensure not only that their products are equipped with all the skills needed to build the national economy, but also are able and motivated to take on the challenge and the opportunities for higher achievement in the science and technology-led knowledge-driven global economy through innovation and creativity

d. Place Research and Innovation at the heart of education in Ghana. The Universities shall be expected to accord priority to research, especially in the bio-medical, computer, agricultural and environmental sciences. We shall foster close integration between the Universities and the Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences (GAAS)and other Research institutions and further create two new institutions:

* a Consultative Council of Researchers, the Association of Ghanaian Industries, Ghana Chamber of Commerce, Representatives of Major Banks and Venture Capital Funds.
The Council shall be expected to help source for funding to take research finding from the laboratory to the market place

* in collaboration with the GAAS, other research institutions and the University, establish a Manufacturing Plant at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology for the production of prototypes of the inventions and creations of scientists and innovators in the country. The Plant will build prototypes to prove the efficacy of the innovations as the decisive step in helping attract investment capital to support them

e. recognising that the success of this Program hinges on the ability to attract and retain the best brains into teaching, the NPP will signal a sea change in the mindset of the nation and especially of the Government in its attitude towards the Teaching Profession. We shall restore to our Teachers the honour and respect they once held as the source of enlightenment at all levels of society and ensure that Teaching becomes once again, a Profession of Choice for our ambitious youth

f. restore physical education and sports as an integral part of a program of wholesome education for a wholesome nation. A healthy mind in a healthy body has always been the fundamental ethos of education. It ensures that all citizens are able to develop fully not only their latent mental faculties but their gifts of prowess. Unfortunately, physical education has been de-coupled from mainstream education in Ghana, thus depriving the Ghanaian child the opportunity to develop fully their natural talent for physical activity and sports. The result is the virtual collapse of sports in Ghana reflected in the woeful performance at the Olympics and other major international sports competitions. Sports in the 21st century cannot be treated as a sideshow, for the pleasure of a few. It is, in today’s world, a major factor in national development, in the health of the economy, in building social cohesion, in warding off the temptations to anti-social behaviour and above all, in job creation. There are more jobs in sports today than in most of the heavy industries on which the world economy runs. There can be no better pathway to professional development than sports for most of the vast army of young men and women who are unemployed in the streets and exposed to all manner of temptations. To end this avoidable waste of natural talents, the NPP will reintegrate physical education and recreation into mainstream education and ensure the restoration of a rational program of sports organisation and competition from the primary to the University level.

As a sign of NPP’s commitment to get all children into school at the right age, the number of public kindergartens was increased by 5,729 schools during our time in government. In the 2001/2 academic year when the NPP begun its first term, there were 6,098 public kindergartens. By the 2008/9 academic year, when the NPP left office, there were 11,827 kindergartens, an increase of 93.94% in the stock of kindergartens.

The NDC, the so-called social democrats, have added only 2,001 public kindergartens in the seven years leading up to 2014/15. A mere 14.4%. It is the private sector that has risen to the challenge and tried to bridge the gap, and added 2,142 kindergartens since the NDC came into power in 2009. It is no wonder NDC has sought to include private school buildings and enrolments in its compilation of education statistical reports in order to mask its incompetence and failures.

The NDC had tried the same trick with the primary schools, by including the private primary schools and passing off the figures as their performance in the public schools. Enrolment of primary school pupils, at the time of the NPP leaving office (2008), had risen by nearly one million from 2,113,749 to 3,041,895 (928,146), representing an increase of over 43%. Over the last 7 years, the NDC increased the population by only 6.6% from 3,041,895 to 3,244,997, a difference of only 203,103.

The NPP will tackle the many problems that beset education in our country with the seriousness and dedication required, because we know that an educated population is key to transforming our nation. We intend to focus on a balanced development of our children to make them competitive in the global economy.

II. OUR PLAN

a. Kindergarten

We shall embark on a vigorous programme to ensure that kindergarten places are available for all four-year old children in the country. The training of early childhood and kindergarten teachers will be prioritized to reflect the importance we attach to the provision of equal opportunities for children from all backgrounds.

b. Primary

The NPP will reintroduce the History of Ghana as a subject for primary schools. The children of the country need to know where we have come from to give them a sound grounding and instil confidence.

c. Secondary, Technical and Vocational Education

* Free SHS

The NPP will redefine basic education to include Senior High School (SHS), covering vocational, agricultural and technical schools, and make it available for free on a universal basis to all Ghanaians.

* Vocational and Skill training

The technical, vocational and skill training sectors have not received the important attention they deserve. We acknowledge that it is the technicians and those with vocational skills that will define the workforce of an industrialized Ghana. We aim to dispel the notion that this sector is for dropouts. We shall ensure that each region has two state-of-the-art technical and vocational institutions to demonstrate our commitment to the sector. We shall upgrade and revamp existing technical and vocational institutions to ensure that training for world-class employable skills is conducted in world-class surroundings. Within the first year, the NPP will undertake a national audit of skills and competencies in a bid to align training opportunities and resources to respond to national and local human resource demands.

d. Management Of Schools

To ensure that standards are improved and maintained across pre-tertiary education, the NPP government will strengthen and equip the Inspectorate Board, as an independent body, to enable it carry out its inspection mandate. We will build an effective partnership with religious bodies, civic organizations and the private sector in the delivery of quality education. This partnership will also include the areas of management, supervision and training of teachers in their units.

e. Teachers

* a well-trained, confident and contented teacher will be placed at the heart of NPP’s delivery of quality education. The views of teachers will be sought on education policy innovation and implementation. Their professional development and work environment needs will be treated with respect and we shall ensure that teachers’ salaries and allowances are paid regularly and on time. The NPP will also focus on the provision of incentives that will motivate teachers, and reward their hard work in the classroom.

* the NPP will collaborate with GNAT, NAGRAT, and other teaching associations to facilitate an affordable housing scheme for teachers.

* the NPP will ensure that teachers who upgrade their qualifications and skills are promoted promptly and that their salary increases take immediate effect.

* the NPP will ensure proper decentralization of teachers’ recruitment and other document processing activities and relieve teachers of the frustrating, bureaucratic processing of documents at the centre.

f. Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Education

The NPP will aggressively promote Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education across all levels of the education system.

Mathematics has been identified as the bedrock for progress and survival in the modern world. Unfortunately, mathematics has proved to be a great stumbling block in education in the country. We believe it is time to tackle this problem and break the myth about the fear of mathematics in our education system and in our country. An NPP government will leverage technology to popularize the teaching and learning of Mathematics. Children in every part of the country will have access to mathematics lessons delivered by first class teachers at the highest level. We aim to demystify mathematics and turn the country into a mathematics-friendly nation.

g. Teaching of French

Our neighbours to the east, west and north speak French. Ghana is surrounded by French-speaking countries and yet we have a great deficit in the speaking and understanding of French. Our neighbours, on the other hand, invariably are conversant with English, thus putting us at a disadvantage in our dealings with them.

We shall put in place a programme for the popularization and better teaching of the French language in our schools.

h. Mission Schools

The NPP will strengthen the participation of the Missions in the Mission-founded schools. We believe this will ensure the return of discipline and moral upbringing to our schools.

i. Arabic Education

Arabic/Islamic Instructors in the Zongos and parts of Northern Ghana were paid allowances under the National Volunteer Service Programme by the Kufuor-led NPP government. These were discontinued by the NDC government. The NPP will restore the policy and additionally support Arabic/Islamic instructors with training and other incentives to motivate them to provide good training to our children. We will introduce Arabic as an optional language to be taught and examined at the JHS and SHS levels.

j. Counselling and Guidance

There will be an intense focus on providing effective and professional guidance and counselling services to pupils, students and young people to facilitate their personal growth and development.

k. Sports

School sports will be back as an integral part of school activity to promote the healthy mind in a healthy body requirement of education. The NPP will provide sporting facilities and revive sporting competitions among schools not only for health purposes, but also as a career pathway for students, while fostering a spirit of competitiveness and teamwork.

l. Inclusive Education

The NPP will ensure that children with special needs are not left behind, but are assisted by teachers with the requisite skills in differentiated teaching methods. Whenever possible, facilities will be provided to enable disabled children be integrated within regular schools.

m. ICT and Education

We shall improve the facilities and the curriculum for ICT education at all levels. We shall develop an online educational platform to host, stream, and share short videos of mini-lectures to classrooms or offices around the country. We shall ensure that all teachers have ICT competence. Furthermore, the NPP will, in collaboration with the private sector, provide free WiFi coverage for senior secondary and tertiary institutions nationwide dedicated to learning, administration and enhancing the capacity to do research.

The NPP will also introduce programming at the Junior and Senior High Levels in order to expand the capacity of our students in ICT and train them for the job opportunities that the sector offers.

n. Tertiary Education

The mission of traditional universities will be enhanced through the provision of appropriate and adequate infrastructure and learning facilities to accommodate expansion and ensure conducive teaching and learning and research. In addition to the Book and Research allowances for lecturers, the NPP will establish a Research Fund to facilitate further research and innovation. We will also abolish the payment of utility bills by students. We will also increase the amount of loans under the Student Loan Scheme and restructure to streamline its administration to enhance recovery of the loans.

The NPP will place emphasis on the continuous linkage of academia with industry and the world of work to ensure curriculum relevance, thereby
reducing graduate unemployment. With the conversion of the Polytechnics into Technical Universities, an NPP government will reactivate the original aim of linking Technical/Vocational institutions to the Technical Universities. They will be assisted to refocus on technical education and will be at the forefront of the NPP’s One District, One Factory programme. NPP will encourage the Colleges of Education to update their curricula to ensure they produce graduates that would teach the well-equipped and critical thinking population we need to move the country forward.

Under the NPP, teacher trainee allowances will be fully restored. In addition, mechanisms will be put in place to ensure salaries of new teachers are promptly paid unlike the current situation under the NDC which has seen significant delays in their payment.

Chapter 10
HEALTH
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The health system in the country is critical for national development. The vision of the NPP is to see that the right to health of all Ghanaians is guaranteed through an established health sector with sustainable ability to deliver affordable, equitable and easily accessible healthcare.

To realise this vision, the NPP will expand health promotion programmes, scale up disease prevention strategies and improve access to curative and emergency services, through vigorous human resource and health infrastructure development and strengthening of the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS).

Under the leadership of President J.A. Kufuor, the NPP improved the health of Ghanaians by the:

i. introduction and implementation of NHIS and free maternal care

ii. implementation of the Community Health Planning and Service concept

iii. establishment of the National Ambulance Service

iv. expansion, equipping and increasing of the number of health facilities

v. capacity building and increase of the number of health professionals

vi. establishment of the Ghana Postgraduate Medical College

vii. introduction of Regenerative Health and Nutrition through health promotion programmes

viii. improvement of the provision of vaccine for preventable childhood diseases

ix. provision of highly subsidized anti-retroviral medicines for HIV/AIDS patients, and

x. introduction of sanitation programmes.

I. NPP PRIORITY AREAS

The NPP seeks to position Ghana to address comprehensively local, national and emerging global health concerns e.g. Zika and Ebola viruses and the increasing incidence of non-communicable diseases.

The NPP broadly classifies our challenges into three priority areas.

* Global Health Concerns:

i. epidemic preparedness

ii. the threat of epidemics - Ebola, Meningitis, Zika virus, Yellow Fever

iii. antimicrobial resistance, and

iv. non-communicable diseases

* National Health Emergencies:

i. health financing gap

ii. emergency preparedness to deal with acute injuries and disasters.

iii. poor sanitation - pervasive filth and resulting diseases

iv. teenage pregnancy and early marriage, and

v. high road traffic accidents

* National Health Concerns:

i. disparity in health resource allocation

ii. mental health

iii. neglected tropical diseases

iv. weak primary health care

v. decentralization of health system, and

vi. malaria & other communicable diseases e.g. TB

NPP’s resolve to strengthen the health system will be guided by 7 principles as follows:

i. ensuring and mainstreaming a Health-in-All Policy approach with government agencies taking into account the health implications of their work programmes

ii. One Health approach with health initiatives that mitigate the exposure of risk by the interaction of humans, animals and the environment

iii. a Gender Sensitive and Gender Responsive Health System with a special focus on the health needs of women and children will be ensured

iv. addressing health disparities in allocating resources and motivating health workers

v. increasing health financing

vi. expanding Primary Health Care with respect to reach, quality, and presence of skilled personnel, and

vii. focusing on the social determinants of health

To ensure that Ghana is a healthy nation, the NPP will:

II. RESCUE AND RESTRUCTURE THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME (NHIS)

The NHIS has collapsed over the past 8 years under the watch of the NDC government. The next NPP government will revive the National Health Insurance Scheme to make it efficient, with capacity to finance health services on a timely basis in a bid to achieve universal health coverage for all Ghanaians by:

a. reviewing and restructuring the sources of funding, as well as the institutional arrangements for the management of the National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF)

b. increasing budgetary allocations to the NHIS

c. directing and strictly ceding all funds raised through the NHIA Levy into the NHIF, and concentrating on activities that focus on quality patient treatment, medication, and care

d. utilising the best in technology and health insurance management protocols to tackle waste, corruption, and insurance claim fraud under the NHIS. This will include completely phasing out
the manual processing of claims (claims management) which currently stands at about 90%, tightly linking services and drugs to hospital attendance, and treatment to diagnosis

e. adopting a modernised strategy towards drugs procurement, including the establishment of a preferred pharmacy network, incentivising appropriate prescriptions, and gradually shifting away from the Central Medical Stores arrangement, and

f. emphasising preventive healthcare

III. ADDRESS SECTOR DISPARITIES

The NPP will address the disparities in the health sector by:

a. supporting the manpower needs of the MMDAs and the overall healthcare sector by:

* investing in the expansion and equipping of medical schools to train more medical doctors

* restoring trainee nurses’ allowances in full

* streamlining the operations of and improving health- training institutions

* providing free specialist postgraduate training in our established postgraduate training institutions, and

* restoring and streamlining tax reliefs, abolished by the NDC government, which facilitated the purchase of vehicles by healthcare workers under the Kufuor-led NPP government

b. strengthening emergency capacity and capability nationwide, including building an Accident and Emergency Centre in Takoradi,

c. strengthening the National Ambulance Service and ensuring collaboration with NADMO

d. upgrading all existing District Hospitals where they exist, and where they do not, establishing one. NPP’s aim is for each District to have at least one hospital

e. strengthening the flagship Community Health Planning Services (CHPS) programme in the areas of:

* community participation

* infrastructure and financing

* quality service delivery by skilled health staff

* supervision and monitoring, and

* surveillance and disease control

f. establishing, in collaboration with the private sector, wellness clinics at all levels of healthcare

g. working with the private sector to establish a world class Research & Laboratory Centre within a responsive National Laboratory System

h. using a mix of policy and incentives to encourage private sector investments in the development of healthcare facilities, including hospitals and related services

i. implementing a National Epidemic Response System

j. amending health laws on administration, management and financing to create an environment conducive for decentralisation

k. strengthening the pharmaceutical industry and services to ensure:

* policies on procurement and prescription guarantee the availability of effective drugs, whilst ensuring drugs are used appropriately, and

* improvement of drug supply chain by expanding rapidly local production and ensuring quality affordable drugs are available

l. working with the private sector to establish a national bioequivalence laboratory

m. coordinating with all government agencies to ensure that improved sanitation and waste management are pillars of their operations

n. providing legislative, administrative and financial support for the implementation of the Mental Health Bill, control of non-communicable and neglected tropical diseases, organ transplantation and assisted reproduction

o. improving health facilities and providing Centres of Excellence through partnerships with the private sector.

p. working with the private sector to establish trauma centres within hospitals along the main highways, in order to facilitate medical treatment of citizens in cases of accidents

q. making Ghana the destination of choice for health tourism in the ECOWAS region

r. making accessible, affordable and of high quality the continuum of care a woman experiences through fertility period to delivery, including the health of children

s. promoting good nutrition and physical activity as a shared national value

t. implementing a comprehensive plan for the safe disposal of biomedical waste

u. strengthening health research institutions

v. incorporating traditional medicine in the health delivery system

w. prioritising the training and skills development of health staff

x. developing an inter-sectorial action plan to reduce the incidence of teenage pregnancy and early marriage

y. improving health data quality to inform local, district and national planning

z. improving efficiency to ensure limited resources are used prudently, and making sure existing hospitals and clinics are adequately supplied with basic drugs, gloves, syringes, oxygen, and anti-snake serum, many of which are not even available in some teaching hospitals.

IV. POLICY ON CANCER

NPP recognises the increasing incidence of cancers (childhood cancers, breast cancer, cervical cancer, prostate and other cancers) as a national problem.

In this regard, the NPP will establish centres at all levels of our healthcare delivery system for screening, diagnosis, early detection and prevention of these cancers, and this will be paid for under the restructured and revitalised NHIS.

Chapter 11
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. BUILDING A FAIR AND INCLUSIVE SOCIETY

The NPP aims to create a society of fair opportunities for all Ghanaians. Building on the far-reaching social intervention policies of the Kufuor-led NPP administration, such as the National Youth Employment Programme (NYEP), Capitation Grant, the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), Free Maternal Care, Microfinance and Small Loan Centre (MASLOC), Mass Cocoa Spraying Exercise, Metro Mass Transit Transport Service, Ghana School Feeding Programme (GSFP) and the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty Programme (LEAP), the NPP will help create a fair and inclusive society, which ensures that all citizens share in the country’s wealth and prosperity.
This will be achieved by establishing a well-funded, functioning welfare system which addresses the needs of the weak, marginalised, vulnerable and socially excluded.

The NPP will:

a. amend the Disability Act to bring it into line with the UN Convention on Disability

b. pass appropriate Legislative Instruments for the implementation of the Mental Health Act, 2012 (Act 846) and the Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715)

c. staff and properly resource the National Council on Persons with Disability in partnership with civil society organisations

d. implement inclusive education for persons with disability

e. implement equal employment opportunity policies for appointment into public offices for persons living with disability

f. ensure the National Council on Persons with Disability (NCPD) is decentralized to the regional level in order to coordinate the activities of the various federations

g. enforce section 18 of the Disability Act that provides for free education for persons with disability

h. implement the 3% increase in Common Fund disbursements to persons with disability, announced in 2012, but which remains
unimplemented

i. ensure that the portion of DACF meant for persons with disability are disbursed through the decentralized district and regional
offices of the NCPD

j. modernise, improve and resource special training school for persons with disability, to train them on technical and skill training
programmes, and

k. encourage private institutions to reserve a quota of jobs that can be filled by persons with disability.

II. LIVELIHOOD EMPOWERMENT AGAINST POVERTY PROGRAMME (LEAP):

Under NPP, the original design of LEAP was not to create lifelong dependents, but to help households "LEAP" out of poverty. In that
direction, the cash-transfer component was to be complemented with training in income-generating activities, with the view to equipping households with the skills and resources they need to help themselves out of poverty.

NPP plans to refocus the programme, which has become a blatant source of political patronage, by:

a. adopting effective, accurate means-testing to target, identify and enrol properly beneficiary households

b. establishing a consistent and regular monthly disbursement plan, and

c. targeting female-headed households, where intervention may have the greatest positive impact.

III. THE GHANA SCHOOL FEEDING PROGRAMME (GSFP) WILL BE ENHANCED BY:

a. instituting measures to reduce administrative cost to the barest minimum

b. rationalising and improving monitoring processes under the GSFP

c. training caterers on the hygienic preparation of nutritious food

d. providing adequate funding for monitoring

e. ensuring regular payments are made to caterers, and

f. stimulating local agricultural growth, by requiring caterers to buy and use foodstuff grown locally from local farmers.

IV. MAINSTREAM AGING, RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS INTO NATIONAL PLANNING AND SERVICE DELIVERY

The NPP will develop and implement policies for the aged and mainstream aging issues into national development frameworks and poverty eradication strategies.

Currently, the financial viability of Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) is in question. The World Bank, in its 2016 Report on Governance of SSNIT, states that "the actuarial valuation shows that the Fund becomes cashflow negative in 2019 and all the assets would be used up by 2031. At this point, benefits will have to match inflows and will lead to very significant cuts in benefits for current pensioners."

While the new Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766) was a marked improvement on the then existing law and made provisions for extending coverage to the vast number of workers not covered under the basic national social security by way of the voluntary Tier 3 schemes, the reality on the ground is that a substantial segment of workers in the informal sectors of the economy do not have any form of retirement income programme covering them.

A major reason for the absence of coverage for the majority of workers in the informal economy is that current operational and administrative practices and systems in the retirement income industry have not developed innovative approaches and systems to facilitate the extension of coverage to this critical segment of our working population. Key among such challenges is the absence of effective contribution collection systems adaptable to these informal wage earners.

Given this background information on the state of the retirement income programmes in the country, the NPP will adopt as a vital element of its poverty eradication and social support programme for the vulnerable in our society, a retirement income scheme for two significant demographic segments of our society, namely:

a. farmers (including ancillary farm hands) in our major cash crop agricultural sectors like cocoa, coffee, sheanuts, palm oil, pineapple and cashew nuts; and

b. members of small scale business associations included in umbrella organizations such as GPRTU/PROTOA, Association of Small Scale Enterprises (ASSE), mechanics (fitters) and similar associations across the country.

Furthermore, the NPP will:

a. ensure that funds of the National Pensions Regulatory Authority (NPRA) are applied solely for the development of the pensions industry

b. fully implement section 103 (assignment of pension benefits for housing of workers) of the National Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766)

c. pay all outstanding contributions to pension funds, including Tier 2 contributions, for public sector workers

d. use the appropriate information technology platform to decentralize and automate pension payments, and establish desks in each District Assembly for this purpose

e. provide the aged with a Freedom Pass to enable them ride for free on all public transportation, and

f. undertake a comprehensive review of SSNIT’s investments and costs to ensure its financial sustainability.

IV. WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT & CHILDREN’S RIGHTS

The NPP, under the Kufuor-led NPP government, in demonstration of the importance of women and children in the society, set up Ghana’s first Ministry for Women and Children’s Affairs.

Today, the NPP remains committed to gender equality and children’s rights and will work assiduously to achieve the following:

a. appointment of women to at least 30% of available public office positions

b. setting aside 50% of MASLOC funds for female applicants

c. reintroduce and enforce the administrative directive on the reservation of 30% of poverty alleviation/credit funds of MMDA’s to service womens’ enterprises

d. reducing the Kayayei (Head Porters) phenomenon by:

* improving the economy of their districts of origin to curb the migration

* providing alternate life skills training and seed capital, as well as partnering the private sector, NGOs and charities to provide temporary hostel facilities

* we will work with the District Assemblies to exempt Kayayei from market tolls and taxes currently imposed on them, and

* improving their access to education and health care.

In addition, NPP will pursue in the area of women and children’s welfare the following:

a. implementing fully the Domestic Violence, Human Trafficking and Disability Acts and ensuring that other relevant pieces of legislation are implemented in full

b. continue implementing the policies that increased enrolment and retention in schools, like the school feeding programme and capitation grant. Special emphasis will also be placed on proper diagnosis and treatment of children with learning disabilities like dyslexia and other special needs. Their education will be mainstreamed as far as practicable with the full implementation of the inclusive education policy

c. introducing a District Integrated Social Services programme for children, families and vulnerable adults to consolidate the relevant health, education, and justice systems, as well as all social protection programmes

d. strengthening and enforcing regulations, and introducing national minimum standards for residential children’s homes, and

e. strengthening regulations and reforming the adoption and foster care regime and providing incentives for fostering at-risk children.

Chapter 12
GOVERNANCE, CORRUPTION AND PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. GOVERNANCE

The fundamental requirement for sustainable development is good governance. The NPP is irrevocably committed to the establishment of a solid, efficient machinery for good governance, comprising accountable government and respect for the rule of law and human rights.

To realise this, the NPP government will deepen the culture of the rule of law by:

a. upholding and promoting the separation of powers. The NPP government will make adequate provision to secure the independence of the Judiciary and will help to strengthen the institutional capacity of Parliament, and

b. promoting and instilling within the state security agencies an enhanced ethic and culture of respect for the rights and freedoms of citizens

The NPP will also deepen political participation by:

a. appointing women to at least 30% of available public office positions

b. bringing back the People’s Assemblies to encourage citizens to participate in government, and

c. ensuring that citizens and public bodies are fully aware of their respective duties and rights in the delivery of public service; and
empowering citizens to demand the quality of public service to which they are entitled.

II. CURRENT STATE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY

Ghana, a well-endowed country, has been brought to its knees and has been reduced to borrowing and begging from foreign creditors and donors to finance even its most mundane development needs. Corruption is what has brought this shame upon us all. Corruption holds back economic growth, increases cost of doing business, reduces revenue to the state, leads to capital flight and inflates the cost of running government. It results in a loss of legitimacy and respect for legally-constituted authority. Corruption demoralises honest people and fills them with uncertainty, mistrust and fear. It stifles initiative and creativity and dampens motivation. It undermines the merit system of rewards, appointments and success and it encourages mediocrity, laziness and incompetence.

Under the NDC administration, corruption has become widespread, heralding the entry of the phrase - CREATE, LOOT and SHARE - into the Ghanaian lexicon, introduced by the Supreme Court in a ruling on a corruption case.

The corruption under John Mahama’s NDC Government is exemplified by:

a. rampant contract price inflation

b. abuse of the procurement processes, with sole sourcing the most abused process

c. public accountability reduced to highlighting government projects, without accompanying monetary cost

d. anti-corruption institutions being underfunded

e. revelations of stealing and looting not investigated with potential culprits going unpunished, and finding shelter in the Office of the President in an open display of impunity

f. payments of dubious judgment debts and questionable settlements, and

g. flagrant nepotism and cronyism.

The Mahama-led NDC government pays lip service to the fight against corruption. There is no real commitment to fighting corruption as the Attorney General’s Office either refuses to prosecute or where there have been prosecutions, does so shoddily.

We cannot continue along this path if we are to build a secure, peaceful and prosperous society for ourselves and posterity. The NPP and its leadership commit to fighting corruption with renewed vigour, honesty and integrity. We intend to ensure that public funds are spent on their intended purposes and the people of Ghana get value for money in public expenditures. The NPP will fight corruption head-on through preventive, detective, corrective and punitive actions.

Our anti-corruption policy will be based on three key pillars: institutional reform, legislative reform, and attitudinal change/public education.

Some of the specific actions the NPP will undertake under these pillars are:

III. INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

a. Office of The Special Prosecutor

The Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) and the Economic and Organised Crime Office (EOCO) require the permission of the Attorney General to prosecute. The monopoly of prosecutorial authority by an Attorney-General, who is hired and fired by the President, has been singled out by governance experts as one of the key factors that stand in the way of using law enforcement and prosecution as a credible tool in the fight against corruption. Such institutional bottle-necks impede the fight against corruption.

To this end, we intend to establish, by an Act of Parliament, an Office of the Special Prosecutor, who will be independent of the Executive, to investigate and prosecute certain categories of cases and allegations of corruption and other criminal wrongdoing, including those involving alleged violations of the Public Procurement Act and cases implicating political officeholders and politicians.

b. Strengthening the Institutions of State

NPP will enhance accountability in governance by promoting the effective separation of powers. Adequate provision to secure the independence of the Judiciary will be made and we will help to strengthen the institutional capacity of Parliament to solidify parliamentary oversight of the Executive.

Furthermore, we shall require the Attorney General to report to Parliament annually on the potential liability of the State arising out of claims against the State. We shall support and provide all institutions whose mandates cover anti-corruption with enhanced financial resources to recruit, train, engage and retain a large number of technical personnel to investigate and educate against corruption.

c. Assets Declaration Regime

An NPP government will implement an effective Assets Declaration Regime by fostering a working environment for asset declaration that includes the following elements:

* the President shall, within 14 days, forward a list of appointments, made in pursuant of Chapter 24 of the Constitution, to the Auditor General

* effective monitoring of asset declaration, by amending the law to require the Auditor General to publish periodically the list of all persons appointed under Chapter 24 of the Constitution, who have declared or defaulted

* amend the law relating to asset declaration to provide for sanctions which may include forfeiture of appointment, and

* Parliament will be called upon to amend the law to provide for public disclosure of asset declarations.

d. Code of Conduct

As part of the fight against corruption, the NPP government shall enact, popularize and enforce a comprehensive code of conduct for public officials so as to give full meaning and effect to the provisions of Article 284 of the Constitution.

e. Statutory funds

The NPP will establish an automatic mechanism for transfer of statutory funds to designated agencies such as the Ghana Education Trust Fund (GETFund), District Assemblies Common Fund (DACF) and NHIS as stipulated by law.

IV. LEGISLATIVE AND OTHER REFORMS

The agenda of legislative reform will generally review the legal, regulatory and institutional framework for anti-corruption.

In order to adopt legislative measures that will operationalize the relevant articles on corruption in the UN Convention Against Corruption, the NPP will do the following:

a. amend the relevant sections of the Criminal Offences Act, 1960 (Act 29), particularly sections 3, 151, and 239-257, to make corruption a felony rather than a misdemeanour

b. reform laws to set time limits within which an appointing authority must fill any vacancy or confirm a person acting in that office where that institution has a watchdog role

c. ensure the passage of the Right to Information bill if the present Parliament delays in doing so

d. introduce legislation to improve prevention, detection, reporting, investigations and prosecution

e. propose a law for the establishment of the Office of the Special Prosecutor

f. strengthen institutions like Parliament, the Judiciary, and other state institutions, and resource them sufficiently to be effective

g. ensure the strict enforcement of the Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663)

h. ensure transparency by establishing a transaction price database, which will be periodically reviewed to conform to market trends

i. resource the Auditor General’s office to set up a Procurement Audit Unit to conduct value for money audits with the view to detecting and prosecuting corrupt practices

j. bring to an end the prevailing regime of impunity, where people found to have stolen or fraudulently benefited from public funds are merely requested by the Attorney General to refund same on their own terms or are sheltered at the Office of the President, and also ensure the implementation of the recommendations of the Auditor General and Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of Parliament.

V. ATTITUDINAL CHANGE/PUBLIC EDUCATION

The NPP intends to resource the National Commission on Civic Education (NCCE) to provide public education and sensitisation on the negative effects of corruption, as well as to initiate and sustain a national conversation on the values that should shape the transformation of the country. This should strengthen the citizen’s resolve to resist, condemn and report corruption and demand accountability.

Finally, the NPP in government will sponsor the establishment of an interactive website for public reporting of corrupt practices in accordance with the Whistle Blower’s Act, 2006 (Act 720).

Chapter 13
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The NPP is committed to bringing governance to the doorsteps of the people. We will focus on effective and efficient decentralization through greater grassroots participation, better planning and improved service delivery in local communities.
Over the past eight years, the NDC, under John Mahama, has failed to add to the financial resources of the District Assemblies. Rather, his
government has instituted a practice by which a large portion of the DACF is deducted at source for spending by the Ministry. Only 33.3% of the allocated DACF is actually transferred for direct utilization by the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs). This weakens
the effective functioning of local government.
The last NPP government improved human resource capacity and increased budgetary support to MMDAs. The District Assemblies Common Fund was increased from 5.0 to 7.5% of total national revenue. A District Development Fund was also established with a seed fund of US$25 million. Legal backing was given to the Institute of Local Government Studies as the key capacity-building institution, responsible for generating the requisite personnel to man local governments.

An NPP government will undertake the following measures to ensure that local governance and decentralization are enhanced:

I. POLITICAL DECENTRALISATION

NPP will:

a. oversee the direct election of Metropolitan, Municipal and District Chief Executives (MMDCEs) within 24 months of election into office, to coincide with the next District Assembly elections in
2019

b. strengthen the sub-structures of MMDAs through capacity building and adequate resource allocation

c. strengthen the role of traditional authorities within the local government system, and

d. improve allowances paid to assembly members.

II. LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICE AND CAPACITY BUILDING

NPP will:

a. review the Local Government Service regime and practice, to ensure that local level action is not stifled by top-heavy bureaucratic institutions, especially in recruitment and procurement, against the background of a seeming scheme of re-centralization under the recently established Local Government Service, and

b. upgrade the Tamale campus of Institute of Local Government Service (ILGS) into a modern state-of the-art institute to train local government practitioners and staff in northern Ghana.

III. FISCAL DECENTRALIZATION

NPP will ensure that fiscal decentralization is fully implemented through the following initiatives;

a. abolishing the current practice of central Government manipulation of the DACF through the procurement process

b. decentralizing and equipping the Land Valuation Board (LVB) to provide direct technical support on property valuation to MMDAs for enhanced revenue mobilization, and

c. ensuring the speedy enactment of the Municipal Finance Bill, initiated by the Kufuor-led NPP administration, into law. This law will provide space to MMDAs to access funds from the capital market for rapid socio economic development and partner the private sector to provide job opportunities to local people.

IV. SANITATION MANAGEMENT

The NPP will ensure the consolidation of all existing national sanitation policies, plans and programmes into a Comprehensive National Sanitation
Programme and Action Plan.

The NPP will establish a National Sanitation Fund to fund this Action Plan.

Sources of the Fund shall include:

a. allocations from the Consolidated Fund

b. contributions from sanitation related industries, and

c. sanitation related fines

The NPP will also promote recycling of refuse through the use of incentive packages.

Chapter 14
SECURITY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Ghanaians are becoming increasingly concerned about their security, due to the increasing levels of crime and lawlessness under the Mahama-led NDC government. Today, Ghanaians do not feel safe. The Mahama-led NDC government has failed the people of Ghana in terms of the security of the country and of its citizens. Our existing laws are largely not enforced, and when they are, they are done selectively, often with much interference from the Executive.

The NPP Government will secure peace and security for all Ghanaians. Under the NPP Government, Ghanaians will feel safe on the streets and in their homes. Ghanaians will go about their daily business in the secure knowledge that their persons, properties and lives are safe under an NPP Government. NPP believes that the strict enforcement of our existing laws by our security agencies, without selectivity, will go a long way to sanitize our nation, assuage the fears of the citizenry and dramatically transform our society.

In this regard, the next NPP government will ensure that all our security personnel are properly-trained, properly-resourced, and provided with incentives to enable them discharge professionally their duties and obligations fairly and effectively without any interference from the executive branch of government in order to make the country a safe place for all our citizens.

The NPP will ensure that our security personnel are also adequately prepared to deal with the emerging threats of terrorism and cybercrime, which will be another major priority of our government.

I. IMPROVING LIVING CONDITIONS OF SECURITY SERVICES

The NPP recognises that the conditions, under which the majority of our security services live, have become unacceptable. From inadequate spaces to poor sanitation, many of their barracks have not seen upgrades for decades. As part of our overall commitment to improving the living conditions of our security personnel, the NPP will roll out a National Barracks Regeneration Programme that will invest in rehabilitating and upgrading their living quarters across the country.

II. THE POLICE SERVICE

The NPP will resource our police to continue to maintain law and order and protect lives and property with the following measures:

a. review and restructure recruitment into our police service to stamp out the fraud and cronyism that have been introduced into this process by the Mahama-led NDC government

b. continue to recruit additional personnel, with increased recruitment of women, into the police service, as we work towards the target of meeting the U.N. ratio of 1:500 police to civilians

c. ensure that our marine police unit is expanded and resourced, and that it works in tandem with the Navy to deal effectively with protecting our offshore oil and gas installations, and tackling illegal activities such as pair trawling and drug trafficking in our territorial waters

d. provide the police with modern communication and policing equipment

e. encourage security awareness of the various communities through neighbourhood watch schemes

f. develop a comprehensive policy to enhance the Police’s capacity to tackle cyber-crimes and cyber security issues

g. invigorate highway patrols to combat highway robberies and reduce motor accidents on our roads

h. improve the current police visibility arrangements by strengthening community policing

i. build two new police hospitals at Sunyani and Bolgatanga to serve the health needs of police personnel

j. build 2 new police training schools

k. harmonise and standardise police training across the country

l. improve and resource all police training institutions, including the command college at Winneba, and

m. improve the training of CID personnel both locally and internationally.

III. THE ARMED FORCES

The NPP will continue to provide the Armed Forces with adequate and modern resources to enable them perform their core function of defending the territorial integrity of Ghana. The NPP will also enable them to meet their peacekeeping obligations, provide humanitarian services, including medical evacuation and to participate in national disaster relief, when they occur.

We constructed the second phase, and we will complete the third phase of the 37 Military Hospital project, as well as upgrade its equipment to meet modern medical challenges. We will also construct a new military hospital in Tamale to service the health needs of military personnel and their families in the northern sector of the country.

In addition, the NPP will:

a. improve institutions under the military, including the training schools for other ranks, and Military Academy and Training Schools (MATS), Armed Forces Recruitment Centre, Ghana Armed Forces Command and Staff College and Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Centre

b. protect military lands from encroachment, and

c. continue local and foreign training for Armed Forces personnel

IV. UN PEACEKEEPING MISSION

The NPP, under President Kufuor, in keeping with our tradition of enhancing the welfare of military personnel, increased the troop contribution allowance normally paid to the soldiers from US$16 to US$27 a day, an increase of about 69%. President Mills increased it by 11% to US$30. President Mahama
increased it by just US$1 to US$31, being a mere 3% increase, in all a total of 14% increase over the 8 years of the NDC government.

After announcing the US$1 increase, it was rejected by the military personnel, and under pressure, Mahama was forced to increase it by another US$4 to US$35. The NPP commits to adjusting upwards the allowances in line with new increases by the UN, and will ensure that personnel, who serve in UN Peacekeeping Missions are paid at their duty post.

V. PRISONS SERVCE

The NPP will take immediate steps to decongest our prisons, and introduce a system of separate dedicated prisons for remand and convicted inmates to serve as proper correction homes. We will submit a bill to Parliament to reform our prisons.

Areas of reform will include:

a. pre-trial detention

b. prison management

c. sentencing reform, including non-custodial sentences

d. social integration, and

e. health facilities

We will also invest in the overall welfare of Prisons Service personnel, including its civilian officers, by:

a. enhancing the training for the Service personnel

b. providing modern and strategic equipment to make service personnel more efficient

c. offering competitive remuneration to enable the Service attract the best personnel

d. improving the standards, quality, and number of accommodation for the Service

e. improving healthcare at the Prisons for prisoners, prison officers and civilian employees, and

f. building two Prison Service hospitals, one each in the Southern and Northern sectors of the country.

VI. FIRE SERVCE

NPP’s policy is to provide each district with a Fire Service station where none exists. Where there is one, the NPP will upgrade it as required to meet the minimum standards expected of a modern, well-equipped fire station.

Similar to other services, the NPP will invest in the overall welfare of the men and women of the Fire Service, by:

a. enhancing the training for the Service personnel

b. providing modern and strategic equipment to make them more efficient. In particular, for all locations that make them a necessity, the NPP will provide equipment for use on highrise buildings in
fire incidents, and

c. offering competitive remuneration to enable the Service attract the best personnel.

VII. IMMIGRATION SERVCE

As the principal service at our entry points, the Immigration Service is critical to the security of our borders and in the prevention of cross-border and international crime. Indeed, it is at the forefront of the regional effort to combat growing terrorism. Equally important, it is an agent for offering that traditional Ghanaian welcome that the country is known for to tourists and visitors to our country.

In recognition of their multiple roles, and also as part of the NPP’s aim to grow rapidly our tourism and hospitality sector, we shall pay particular attention to the training and incentivisation of  the personnel of the Immigration Service. In particular, we will offer extensive training in specialist areas in the growing areas of crime detection and prevention, customer service relations, and trends in global cross-border crimes and anti-terrorism tactics. We will also provide modern and strategic equipment to make them more efficient, as well as offering competitive remuneration to enable the Service attract the best personnel.

VIII. NARCOTICS AND THE ILLICIT DRUG TRADE

Increased use and the trade in illegal drugs are major threats to our nation and our youth. It is also an issue of national security, as Ghana has become a major transit point to the extent that the VVIP Lounge at Kotoka International Airport, Accra has been used to facilitate drug trafficking under the Mahama-led NDC government.

The NPP will introduce a robust and comprehensive anti-narcotic drug and anti-organised crime policy with severe sanctions and penalties to serve as deterrence for potential offenders.

Our overall plan will concentrate on six (6) key areas: education, prevention, collaboration, detection, sanctions and rehabilitation. We will educate the youth about the hazards of narcotic drugs and organized crime. Working with our international partners, we will institute measures to prevent hard drugs from being imported into the country, and also eliminate the country’s reputation as a trans-shipment point. We will strengthen the country’s detection institutions and systems.

IX. SMALL ARMS

The NPP will take all necessary measures to curb the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and enforce laws on their illegal possession, manufacturing and trade. To improve the safety and security of our citizens, and to combat the use of small arms in conflicts, we will take the relevant steps to control effectively the ease of availability of small arms in the country. We will support the Small Arms and Light Weapons Board to streamline the manufacture, importation, sale and distribution of small arms in the country.

To achieve this objective, we will take the following measures:

a. regulate small arms transfers and sales activities

b. destroy surplus and confiscated weapons

c. curb the smuggling of small arms and light weapons into the country, and

d. ensure that the protocol on small arms and light weapons is incorporated into our domestic law.


Chapter 15
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Since independence, Ghana has been held in high esteem in the comity of nations, thanks to its consistent show of leadership in international matters, especially within the West African region and on the African continent. Our foreign policy will be one of the principal agents of Ghana’s socioeconomic resurgence. The NPP will improve on the efficiency and effectiveness of our foreign missions. We will redirect their emphasis to the search for economic opportunities with the view to opening markets for Ghanaian goods, while attracting foreign investments into the Ghanaian economy.

To achieve this, the NPP will also review existing policies to take into account the new world order with respect to developments like Brexit, the emergence of China and other BRICS nations – Brazil, Russia, India and South Africa.

I. ECONOMIC DIPLOMACY

The NPP will prioritise the development of economic opportunities in our foreign policy, by opening up markets abroad for Ghanaian goods and services and attracting foreign investments. An important task of our diplomatic missions will be to link our businessmen with foreign counterparts in strategic alliances and partnerships to develop the private sector, and to market the country as an attractive destination for foreign investment. The Ministry will facilitate linkages between Ambassadors and High
Commissioners and MMDCEs with the view of maximising investment and trade opportunities for local authorities.

II. DEMOCRACY AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Under the Kufuor-led NPP government, Ghana was seen as the poster boy of the African rising narrative. Unfortunately, the country has lost this image. Our stature in the comity of nations has considerably diminished under the watch of the Mahama-led NDC government. The NPP will restore our lost image. The NPP is proud of its democratic heritage. We will support democracy and the growing trend towards democratisation in all parts of the world, especially in Africa. The NPP will support the strengthening of democratic governance, the rule of law, civil rights and political freedoms everywhere. We remain firmly committed to our membership of ECOWAS, the African Union (AU), NEPAD, La Francophonie, the Commonwealth and the UN. These organisations champion the cause of democracy, good governance, human rights and the rule of law. Ghana, under the NPP, will improve her stake and role in a strong and vibrant regional market and enhance our role in the activities of the AU.

III. MULTILATERALISM IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The NPP believes strongly that Ghana can defend its national interests, and maintain its sovereign independence, yet take decisions with its more powerful friends, partners and allies without deferring to them.

IV. GHANA AND ECOWAS

Recognising the advantages of an expanded market for intra-regional trade and economic co-operation, the NPP will work towards the realisation of all the objectives of ECOWAS, including working for the rapid establishment of an ECOWAS regional market. A strong and vibrant ECOWAS will not only be a stimulus for our economic development, but will also serve as a springboard for the realisation of an African Economic Community. The NPP government will encourage all groupings within the region to harmonise their objectives and operations with a view to facilitating rapidly the achievement of a united and strong West Africa as a basis for a united and strong Africa.

V. GHANA AND THE AFRICAN UNION (AU)

The NPP is fully committed to the objectives of the AU. We will do all in our power to make the Union work more efficiently and purposefully for the advancement of the African continent and its peoples, as stated in Agenda 2063. We will support the genuine aspirations of all African countries towards the realisation of Africa’s developmental objectives. The NPP will play an active part in the effort to create the African Continental Free Trade Area (ACFTA).

VI. GHANA AND THE COMMONWEALTH

Ghana’s ties to the governments and peoples of the Commonwealth are based on shared democratic values, history, language and common interests. We will not waver in upholding the tenets of the Commonwealth of Nations. Our continued membership of the Commonwealth will help foster greater international understanding, internalise best practices, and maximise our benefits through economic and technical cooperation and enhance international peace and security.

VII. GHANA AND THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION OF LA FRANCOPHONIE

The NPP will strengthen our ties with other members of the International Organisation of La Francophonie as a means of broadening our global reach in promoting our culture, tourism, trade and investment relations.

VIII. GHANA AND THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATION

Ghana will continue to play an active role in the UN and its specialised agencies as well as other affiliated agencies like ILO, FAO, UNICEF, World Bank and the IMF, and continue our commitment to attaining the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

IX. GHANAIANS LIVING ABROAD

A significant aspect of our foreign policy will be the promotion of the welfare of Ghanaians living in the diaspora. The NPP will endeavour to avail all our nationals living abroad due access to all provisions of laws that affect them. The NPP will continue to welcome back to the country Ghanaians living in the diaspora, as well as people of African descent and make them feel at home. We will develop close social and cultural ties with our kith and kin to our mutual benefit. The granting of dual citizenship has now restored the basic rights of Ghanaians living abroad, who, for one reason or another, had to adopt the citizenship of their host countries, and thereby lost their Ghanaian citizenship. Ghanaians living abroad are a critical part of the skills base that is needed for economic transformation. Rather than treating Ghanaians in the diaspora as second-class citizens, the NPP would put in place a policy framework that would encourage those, who may or may not have acquired other citizenships to bring their skills back home to assist in the development of our country. We shall expand further the opportunities that will allow Ghanaians living abroad to participate fully in our national discourse and benefit fully from the opportunities this nation has to offer.

In furtherance of this, we will help in the implementation of the Representation of The People’s Law, 1992 (PNDCL 284), as amended (alias ROPAL). The Diaspora Affairs Bureau will also be moved from the Foreign Ministry to the Office of the President to coordinate more effectively all matters affecting Ghanaians in the diaspora.

Chapter 16
YOUTH AND SPORTS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. YOUTH AGENDA

The youth constitute our major source of human capital for the transformational agenda of the country. Hence, all efforts should be made to employ their talents and skills for sustained growth of the economy. However, thanks to the toxic mixture of mismanagement, incompetence, and corruption, Ghanaian youth are, today, more than ever despondent.

Youth unemployment has reached crisis levels. Millions are unemployed, and have no access to capital to start businesses on their own. The NYEP (later reincarnated as GYEEDA, and now operating as YEA), established to bring relief, has collapsed under the weight of unprecedented corruption. It is obvious that it is the youth who will drive the discovery of new technologies, innovation and growth in the future. The NPP’s national youth policy is designed to help shape our youth for this role through developing leadership skills, quality education, entrepreneurship, job skills, creative skills and sports. We will create an enabling environment to build the capacity of our youth to take on more active roles in our country’s future and its development.

In pursuant of this, we will focus on the following:

a. setting up a Youth Development Authority (YDA) to harmonise and coordinate all government-sponsored youth initiatives and policies

b. establishing a Youth Enterprises Fund (YEF) that will provide funding and business development services for businesses owned by young entrepreneurs, especially start-ups

c. developing industrial parks in all regions targeting young Ghanaians, who start or wish to start small businesses, to provide them with access to workspaces, equipment and basic services, including electricity and water

d. implementing our proposed policy that ensures businesses established by young entrepreneurs under the Youth Enterprise Fund (YEF) participate in bidding for the 30% of the required 70% of Government-funded contracts to be sourced from entities owned by women, persons with disability and young persons

e. offering tax incentives to young entrepreneurs to encourage them to initiate start-ups

f. introducing tax credits and other incentives for companies that hire young graduates from tertiary institutions

g. concentrating on ICT training to create job avenues locally and offshore for our youth, and

h. instituting a Buy-Local policy for Government agencies with regards to ICT to ensure that applications and software are procured from local ICT firms.

II. SPORTS DEVELOPMENT

Nothing unites Ghanaians more than sports. The development of sports will be a key plank in galvanising our youth to appreciate nationhood and patriotism. Sports also has the potential of creating thousands of jobs, contributing significantly to our GDP and boosting the image of Ghana internationally.

The country is currently faced with a myriad of challenges in all areas of sports. Sports administration under the NDC, for the past eight years, now evokes images of chaos, confusion, massive fraud, endemic corruption and a culture of impunity. There is also inadequate investment in sports, resulting in the low motivation and morale of sports men and women in the country. The absence of an adequate legal framework for sports development and promotion also hinders the development of sports. The lack of a maintenance culture has led to the deterioration of sports infrastructure, and the neglect of school sports and other sporting disciplines have resulted in fallen standards.

Having built two new stadia in Tamale and Sekondi, and reconstructed the Accra, Kumasi and El Wak stadia, the NPP has a proven track-record in sports infrastructure development and we will continue with our vision of maintaining and building sports infrastructure. We will focus on building cordial relationships with the various sporting associations, whether autonomous or semi-autonomous, and ensure increased and dedicated funding for sports. We will also create an enabling environment that will provide the right incentives for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) in sports. Under the NPP, sports development and promotion will be prioritised.

The next NPP government will pursue the development of the sports sector by:

a. modernising sports through the provision of the right legal framework, by enacting the comprehensive Sports Bill initiated under President Kufuor

b. ensuring that District Assemblies fully participate in sports development and promotion

c. developing, in partnership with the private sector, Youth Development & Sports Centres in all Regions. Each centre will house a fully-equipped library, ICT hub, social hall, multi-purpose pitches and courts

d. completing the construction of the University of Ghana stadium started by the Kufuor-led NPP government

e. pursuing the vision of providing modern multi-sport stadia for the regions currently without one, namely Brong Ahafo, Eastern,
Upper East, Upper West and Volta

f. establishing a special unit at the Ministry to develop and promote sporting disciplines other than football, and to concentrate on the revival of school sports

g. putting in place an effective maintenance regime in partnership with the private sector

h. encouraging the private sector to provide funding for sports through the establishment of incentive packages, as well creating a Sports Fund to support the financing of sports

i. establishing three sports colleges in collaboration with the private sector

j. developing a Youth in Sports module to support young sportsmen and women and to create job opportunities for them

k. investing in a special Women-In-Sports programme to help unearth and support female athletes and sports talents across the country, and

l. awarding scholarships to promising young athletes so they can develop in the best of environments.

Chapter 17
TOURISM, CULTURE AND CREATIVE ARTS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. TOURISM

Ghana possesses an extensive array of tourist attractions that include UN Heritage Sites, Forts and Castles, ancient mosques, slave trade artefacts, indigenous craft villages and various wildlife sanctuaries. With the tourism sector underdeveloped, however, we have been unable to exploit the huge potential that our tourist attractions offer in creating wealth and generating jobs, nor in marketing the country as an exciting destination for leisure, conference, sports, health and educational tourism.

The NPP government will focus on transforming the country into a major Meeting, Incentive, Conference, & Exhibition (MICE) centre, as well as on expanding the tourism sector, through investment, innovation, the pursuit of service excellence and meaningful partnerships. This will enable tourism to become a major revenue-generating sector that provides safe, memorable and enjoyable experience for tourists.

To achieve this, the NPP will:

a. aggressively develop our tourist sites to bring them to world-class standards, complete with the requisite amenities and facilities

b. pursue a deliberate marketing programme to promote our unique historical sites, flora and fauna, waterfalls and other cultural artefacts

c. take the staffing of these tourist sites and our hospitality industry as a whole seriously. To improve professionalism in the sector, we will partner with the private sector to set up a state-of-the-art hospitality teaching facility, with an operational hotel, classrooms, kitchens, library, and dormitories

d. encourage local communities to take ownership and be invested in the sustainability of tourist attractions in their localities

The NPP will champion a revenue-sharing programme to inject 5% of tourism revenues from fees of well-developed tourist attractions into local community projects

e. transform the Ghana Tourist Authority into a modern, efficient research and marketing institution with the necessary technical resources and funds to help project the image of Ghana as a globally-recognized tourism brand

f. give priority to high-impact facilities that have the potential to draw more patrons and increase traffic to tourist venues, by providing the incentives for private sector investors to invest in new tourism facilities and upgrade existing ones, such as beach resorts, quality hotels, safaris, heritage villages and fun parks

g. promote domestic tourism, by making it an aggressive plank of our tourism strategy with a marketing drive centred on entrenching a tourism culture among Ghanaians

h. reactivate and resource the Ghana Museums and Monuments Board to function effectively as a repository of both our cultural and historical records

i. to conserve properly our natural tourist attractions, pursue an ecotourism policy that enables us make these sites available whilst protecting the ecosystem, and

j. invest in Tourism IT as an enabler, to improve knowledge and the sharing of information about tourism opportunities in the country.

II. CULTURE

Culture is the very foundation of society and a country’s strength is built on its culture. Ghana has one of the richest and most vibrant cultures in the world. Our foods, our languages, our music, our fabrics, the rich, colourful kente cloth, the smock and the Adinkra symbols are some of the distinctive symbols of what identifies us and gives us confidence in ourselves.

The NPP will give the Arts and Culture Industry the requisite attention and incentives to flourish and to also create jobs and wealth for our people. The Culture Policy, developed and adopted under the Kufuor government, will be reviewed and actively implemented to give our culture pride of place in our national development. We will build a detailed inventory of all our cultural assets, so the nation has a database of these assets. This inventory will include all of Ghana’s tangible assets, like the Larabanga mosque, and intangible cultural assets like rites of passage and values and belief systems, which are in danger of disappearing completely with aging traditional custodians.

The Copyright Act 2005 (Act 690), among other provisions, provides for the protection of Adinkra symbols and the older Kente designs as expression of folklore. The NPP will ensure that the provisions regarding the protection of Kente and Adinkra designs are strictly enforced against illicit exploitation by foreign interests, to enable the country maximize revenue through the proper marketing of these heirlooms.

Government is by far the largest procurer of goods and services in the country. An NPP government will use its purchasing power to promote Made-in-Ghana goods and services.

III. CREATIVE ARTS

With the Creative Arts Sector being perennially under-resourced, it has not blossomed enough to ensure the country’s creative arts professionals are able to make a comfortable living off their work. The sector has the potential to contribute greatly to GDP growth. As such, the NPP will focus on supporting the sector to enable it realize its full potential for generating wealth for its practitioners, create jobs and grow the economy.

To make available funds to modernize and develop the sector, we will establish a Creative Arts Fund. Nothing demoralizes a creative arts professional more than when intellectual property is stolen and misused with no consequences for the copyright thief. The NPP will collaborate with the Chief Justice to create a Division of the High Court, focusing on the Creative Arts to deal with all matters relating to intellectual property rights, complete with a dedicated enforcement unit.

To provide an effective interface with Government and other key stakeholders, the NPP will establish a Creative Arts Council to coordinate and harmonize the various interests and fragmented associations into a well-functioning body to protect the interests of members. We will educate the public on copyright laws and provide the necessary framework for payment of appropriate royalties for creative works. The NPP will collaborate with private sector interests to acquire the technology and equipment needed to log creative works, in order to determine true and deserved royalties.

In order to stimulate an interest in the arts in young people, we will promote regional and district literature, music, dance and drama competitions, particularly in schools and colleges. We will pursue the construction of modern large seating theatres in every regional capital except Accra, beginning with Takoradi, Tamale and Kumasi, as well as setting up an additional Copyright Office in Tamale to cater for the northern sector in addition to the existing ones in Accra and Kumasi.

Chapter 18
CHIEFTAINCY, RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AND CIVIL SOCIETY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. CHIEFTAINCY

The NPP will give due deference to Chiefs as the embodiment of the history and traditions of our people and will support the Chieftaincy institution to preserve, sustain and employ the traditional and cultural values, as well as practices that accelerate wealth creation and social harmony for total development.
Recognising the indispensable role of Chiefs in local government and their existence as symbols of traditional authority, we will support our Chiefs to provide the leadership and focus for local and district development. In this regard, the NPP will ensure the regular and prompt release of Consolidated Funds disbursements due to Chiefs, to enable them carry out their functions.

The NPP will also:

a. ensure the prompt payment of royalties due Chiefs, Queen Mothers and Traditional Councils

b. provide government support to the institution of Chieftaincy in the performance of their duties, their evolution and further modernization

c. support the National House of Chiefs to codify and systematize traditional laws and culture

d. involve Chiefs, Queen Mothers and Traditional Authorities in the afforestation and greening of Ghana with the support of the Forestry Commission

e. foster a collaboration of Government agencies and traditional leaders that will centre on the protection of water bodies and conservation of the environment

f. forge a new and formal collaboration between Chiefs, Queen Mothers and Traditional Authorities with NADMO, so that relief assistance can be better managed in our local communities during natural disasters and other emergencies, and

g. consult traditional authorities on appointments to local government institutions.

II. RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

The NPP recognizes the special role religious organisations play in the development of the nation. Religious bodies have been in partnership with the Ghanaian people in the provision of education, health facilities and moral upbringing for nearly two hundred years. The NPP will continue to engage actively religious organizations as the leading moral-cultural institutions that have a key role in moulding the character and conduct of our citizens. We appreciate the value of the involvement of religious organisations in the management of faith-based schools and we will explore the possibility of enhancing their involvement.

We also acknowledge the important role of the mission hospitals in our healthcare system, especially in the rural areas. The NPP will therefore ensure that religious bodies in the health sector receive their NHIS payments promptly and commits to payments of existing debts expeditiously.

III. CIVIL SOCIETY AND CHARITY ORGANISATIONS

Civil Society in Ghana plays a significant role in governance and development. Right from before independence, voluntary groups, associations and organisations were involved in all sectors of Ghanaian life. An NPP government will launch a new era of cooperation and collaboration with civil society to improve governance and enhance the well-being of Ghanaians. We will work to ensure that the community develops and thrives.

The NPP will create the enabling legislative and economic environment for philanthropy to blossom and promote a new era of giving, knowing that a prosperous Ghana makes it easier for individuals and organisations to support civil society. We will concentrate on interventions that will unleash the potential of all, including the vulnerable, weak and excluded, particularly women, children and PLWDs. We will protect their rights and eradicate or reform harmful, inhumane and inimical cultural and traditional practices.

CONCLUSION

The solutions we have set out in this document have been well-considered. They are a response to the real problems faced by the Ghanaian people as a result of the mismanagement, incompetence and corruption of the Mahama-led NDC government. This Manifesto is our commitment to the people of Ghana. It is a social contract between ourselves and the people of Ghana. We aim to restore hope and to get the country back to working again and relieve the hardships of our people. The plans we have set out are for the long term sustainable development of our country. With the help of the Almighty God, the NPP will build in Ghana the most people friendly and the most business friendly economy in Africa, which will create prosperity for the great majority of our people, and thereby secure the stability of our society and the peace of the nation.

We have an excellent team of men and women who are ready and eager to serve our beloved Ghana. We have a well-thought out programme, and we have a track record of good performance in government. So support us and together, let’s get Ghana working again.

The future is bright.

God bless Ghana, God bless us all.
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM
