
CHAPTER 1

HEALTH
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The health system in the country is critical for national development. The vision of the NPP is to see that the right to health of all Ghanaians is guaranteed through an established health sector with sustainable ability to deliver affordable, equitable and easily accessible healthcare.

To realise this vision, the NPP will expand health promotion programmes, scale up disease prevention strategies and improve access to curative and emergency services, through vigorous human resource and health infrastructure development and strengthening of the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS).

Under the leadership of President J.A. Kufuor, the NPP improved the health of Ghanaians by the:

i. introduction and implementation of NHIS and free maternal care

ii. implementation of the Community Health Planning and Service concept

iii. establishment of the National Ambulance Service

iv. expansion, equipping and increasing of the number of health facilities

v. capacity building and increase of the number of health professionals

vi. establishment of the Ghana Postgraduate Medical College

vii. introduction of Regenerative Health and Nutrition through health promotion programmes

viii. improvement of the provision of vaccine for preventable childhood diseases

ix. provision of highly subsidized anti-retroviral medicines for HIV/AIDS patients, and

x. introduction of sanitation programmes.

I. NPP PRIORITY AREAS

The NPP seeks to position Ghana to address comprehensively local, national and emerging global health concerns e.g. Zika and Ebola viruses and the increasing incidence of non-communicable diseases.

The NPP broadly classifies our challenges into three priority areas.

* Global Health Concerns:

i. epidemic preparedness

ii. the threat of epidemics - Ebola, Meningitis, Zika virus, Yellow Fever

iii. antimicrobial resistance, and

iv. non-communicable diseases

* National Health Emergencies:

i. health financing gap

ii. emergency preparedness to deal with acute injuries and disasters.

iii. poor sanitation - pervasive filth and resulting diseases

iv. teenage pregnancy and early marriage, and

v. high road traffic accidents

* National Health Concerns:

i. disparity in health resource allocation

ii. mental health

iii. neglected tropical diseases

iv. weak primary health care

v. decentralization of health system, and

vi. malaria & other communicable diseases e.g. TB

NPP’s resolve to strengthen the health system will be guided by 7 principles as follows:

i. ensuring and mainstreaming a Health-in-All Policy approach with government agencies taking into account the health implications of their work programmes

ii. One Health approach with health initiatives that mitigate the exposure of risk by the interaction of humans, animals and the environment

iii. a Gender Sensitive and Gender Responsive Health System with a special focus on the health needs of women and children will be ensured

iv. addressing health disparities in allocating resources and motivating health workers

v. increasing health financing

vi. expanding Primary Health Care with respect to reach, quality, and presence of skilled personnel, and

vii. focusing on the social determinants of health

To ensure that Ghana is a healthy nation, the NPP will:

II. RESCUE AND RESTRUCTURE THE NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME (NHIS)

The NHIS has collapsed over the past 8 years under the watch of the NDC government. The next NPP government will revive the National Health Insurance Scheme to make it efficient, with capacity to finance health services on a timely basis in a bid to achieve universal health coverage for all Ghanaians by:

a. reviewing and restructuring the sources of funding, as well as the institutional arrangements for the management of the National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF)

b. increasing budgetary allocations to the NHIS

c. directing and strictly ceding all funds raised through the NHIA Levy into the NHIF, and concentrating on activities that focus on quality patient treatment, medication, and care

d. utilising the best in technology and health insurance management protocols to tackle waste, corruption, and insurance claim fraud under the NHIS. This will include completely phasing out
the manual processing of claims (claims management) which currently stands at about 90%, tightly linking services and drugs to hospital attendance, and treatment to diagnosis

e. adopting a modernised strategy towards drugs procurement, including the establishment of a preferred pharmacy network, incentivising appropriate prescriptions, and gradually shifting away from the Central Medical Stores arrangement, and

f. emphasising preventive healthcare

III. ADDRESS SECTOR DISPARITIES

The NPP will address the disparities in the health sector by:

a. supporting the manpower needs of the MMDAs and the overall healthcare sector by:

* investing in the expansion and equipping of medical schools to train more medical doctors

* restoring trainee nurses’ allowances in full

* streamlining the operations of and improving health- training institutions

* providing free specialist postgraduate training in our established postgraduate training institutions, and

* restoring and streamlining tax reliefs, abolished by the NDC government, which facilitated the purchase of vehicles by healthcare workers under the Kufuor-led NPP government

b. strengthening emergency capacity and capability nationwide, including building an Accident and Emergency Centre in Takoradi,

c. strengthening the National Ambulance Service and ensuring collaboration with NADMO

d. upgrading all existing District Hospitals where they exist, and where they do not, establishing one. NPP’s aim is for each District to have at least one hospital

e. strengthening the flagship Community Health Planning Services (CHPS) programme in the areas of:

* community participation

* infrastructure and financing

* quality service delivery by skilled health staff

* supervision and monitoring, and

* surveillance and disease control

f. establishing, in collaboration with the private sector, wellness clinics at all levels of healthcare

g. working with the private sector to establish a world class Research & Laboratory Centre within a responsive National Laboratory System

h. using a mix of policy and incentives to encourage private sector investments in the development of healthcare facilities, including hospitals and related services

i. implementing a National Epidemic Response System

j. amending health laws on administration, management and financing to create an environment conducive for decentralisation

k. strengthening the pharmaceutical industry and services to ensure:

* policies on procurement and prescription guarantee the availability of effective drugs, whilst ensuring drugs are used appropriately, and

* improvement of drug supply chain by expanding rapidly local production and ensuring quality affordable drugs are available

l. working with the private sector to establish a national bioequivalence laboratory

m. coordinating with all government agencies to ensure that improved sanitation and waste management are pillars of their operations

n. providing legislative, administrative and financial support for the implementation of the Mental Health Bill, control of non-communicable and neglected tropical diseases, organ transplantation and assisted reproduction

o. improving health facilities and providing Centres of Excellence through partnerships with the private sector.

p. working with the private sector to establish trauma centres within hospitals along the main highways, in order to facilitate medical treatment of citizens in cases of accidents

q. making Ghana the destination of choice for health tourism in the ECOWAS region

r. making accessible, affordable and of high quality the continuum of care a woman experiences through fertility period to delivery, including the health of children

s. promoting good nutrition and physical activity as a shared national value

t. implementing a comprehensive plan for the safe disposal of biomedical waste

u. strengthening health research institutions

v. incorporating traditional medicine in the health delivery system

w. prioritising the training and skills development of health staff

x. developing an inter-sectorial action plan to reduce the incidence of teenage pregnancy and early marriage

y. improving health data quality to inform local, district and national planning

z. improving efficiency to ensure limited resources are used prudently, and making sure existing hospitals and clinics are adequately supplied with basic drugs, gloves, syringes, oxygen, and anti-snake serum, many of which are not even available in some teaching hospitals.

IV. POLICY ON CANCER

NPP recognises the increasing incidence of cancers (childhood cancers, breast cancer, cervical cancer, prostate and other cancers) as a national problem.

In this regard, the NPP will establish centres at all levels of our healthcare delivery system for screening, diagnosis, early detection and prevention of these cancers, and this will be paid for under the restructured and revitalised NHIS.

CHAPTER 2
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. BUILDING A FAIR AND INCLUSIVE SOCIETY

The NPP aims to create a society of fair opportunities for all Ghanaians. Building on the far-reaching social intervention policies of the Kufuor-led NPP administration, such as the National Youth Employment Programme (NYEP), Capitation Grant, the National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), Free Maternal Care, Microfinance and Small Loan Centre (MASLOC), Mass Cocoa Spraying Exercise, Metro Mass Transit Transport Service, Ghana School Feeding Programme (GSFP) and the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty Programme (LEAP), the NPP will help create a fair and inclusive society, which ensures that all citizens share in the country’s wealth and prosperity.
This will be achieved by establishing a well-funded, functioning welfare system which addresses the needs of the weak, marginalised, vulnerable and socially excluded.

The NPP will:

a. amend the Disability Act to bring it into line with the UN Convention on Disability

b. pass appropriate Legislative Instruments for the implementation of the Mental Health Act, 2012 (Act 846) and the Disability Act, 2006 (Act 715)

c. staff and properly resource the National Council on Persons with Disability in partnership with civil society organisations

d. implement inclusive education for persons with disability

e. implement equal employment opportunity policies for appointment into public offices for persons living with disability

f. ensure the National Council on Persons with Disability (NCPD) is decentralized to the regional level in order to coordinate the activities of the various federations

g. enforce section 18 of the Disability Act that provides for free education for persons with disability

h. implement the 3% increase in Common Fund disbursements to persons with disability, announced in 2012, but which remains
unimplemented

i. ensure that the portion of DACF meant for persons with disability are disbursed through the decentralized district and regional
offices of the NCPD

j. modernise, improve and resource special training school for persons with disability, to train them on technical and skill training
programmes, and

k. encourage private institutions to reserve a quota of jobs that can be filled by persons with disability.

II. LIVELIHOOD EMPOWERMENT AGAINST POVERTY PROGRAMME (LEAP):

Under NPP, the original design of LEAP was not to create lifelong dependents, but to help households "LEAP" out of poverty. In that
direction, the cash-transfer component was to be complemented with training in income-generating activities, with the view to equipping households with the skills and resources they need to help themselves out of poverty.

NPP plans to refocus the programme, which has become a blatant source of political patronage, by:

a. adopting effective, accurate means-testing to target, identify and enrol properly beneficiary households

b. establishing a consistent and regular monthly disbursement plan, and

c. targeting female-headed households, where intervention may have the greatest positive impact.

III. THE GHANA SCHOOL FEEDING PROGRAMME (GSFP) WILL BE ENHANCED BY:

a. instituting measures to reduce administrative cost to the barest minimum

b. rationalising and improving monitoring processes under the GSFP

c. training caterers on the hygienic preparation of nutritious food

d. providing adequate funding for monitoring

e. ensuring regular payments are made to caterers, and

f. stimulating local agricultural growth, by requiring caterers to buy and use foodstuff grown locally from local farmers.

IV. MAINSTREAM AGING, RETIREMENT AND PENSIONS INTO NATIONAL PLANNING AND SERVICE DELIVERY

The NPP will develop and implement policies for the aged and mainstream aging issues into national development frameworks and poverty eradication strategies.

Currently, the financial viability of Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) is in question. The World Bank, in its 2016 Report on Governance of SSNIT, states that "the actuarial valuation shows that the Fund becomes cashflow negative in 2019 and all the assets would be used up by 2031. At this point, benefits will have to match inflows and will lead to very significant cuts in benefits for current pensioners."

While the new Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766) was a marked improvement on the then existing law and made provisions for extending coverage to the vast number of workers not covered under the basic national social security by way of the voluntary Tier 3 schemes, the reality on the ground is that a substantial segment of workers in the informal sectors of the economy do not have any form of retirement income programme covering them.

A major reason for the absence of coverage for the majority of workers in the informal economy is that current operational and administrative practices and systems in the retirement income industry have not developed innovative approaches and systems to facilitate the extension of coverage to this critical segment of our working population. Key among such challenges is the absence of effective contribution collection systems adaptable to these informal wage earners.

Given this background information on the state of the retirement income programmes in the country, the NPP will adopt as a vital element of its poverty eradication and social support programme for the vulnerable in our society, a retirement income scheme for two significant demographic segments of our society, namely:

a. farmers (including ancillary farm hands) in our major cash crop agricultural sectors like cocoa, coffee, sheanuts, palm oil, pineapple and cashew nuts; and

b. members of small scale business associations included in umbrella organizations such as GPRTU/PROTOA, Association of Small Scale Enterprises (ASSE), mechanics (fitters) and similar associations across the country.

Furthermore, the NPP will:

a. ensure that funds of the National Pensions Regulatory Authority (NPRA) are applied solely for the development of the pensions industry

b. fully implement section 103 (assignment of pension benefits for housing of workers) of the National Pensions Act, 2008 (Act 766)

c. pay all outstanding contributions to pension funds, including Tier 2 contributions, for public sector workers

d. use the appropriate information technology platform to decentralize and automate pension payments, and establish desks in each District Assembly for this purpose

e. provide the aged with a Freedom Pass to enable them ride for free on all public transportation, and

f. undertake a comprehensive review of SSNIT’s investments and costs to ensure its financial sustainability.

IV. WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT & CHILDREN’S RIGHTS

The NPP, under the Kufuor-led NPP government, in demonstration of the importance of women and children in the society, set up Ghana’s first Ministry for Women and Children’s Affairs.

Today, the NPP remains committed to gender equality and children’s rights and will work assiduously to achieve the following:

a. appointment of women to at least 30% of available public office positions

b. setting aside 50% of MASLOC funds for female applicants

c. reintroduce and enforce the administrative directive on the reservation of 30% of poverty alleviation/credit funds of MMDA’s to service womens’ enterprises

d. reducing the Kayayei (Head Porters) phenomenon by:

* improving the economy of their districts of origin to curb the migration

* providing alternate life skills training and seed capital, as well as partnering the private sector, NGOs and charities to provide temporary hostel facilities

* we will work with the District Assemblies to exempt Kayayei from market tolls and taxes currently imposed on them, and

* improving their access to education and health care.

In addition, NPP will pursue in the area of women and children’s welfare the following:

a. implementing fully the Domestic Violence, Human Trafficking and Disability Acts and ensuring that other relevant pieces of legislation are implemented in full

b. continue implementing the policies that increased enrolment and retention in schools, like the school feeding programme and capitation grant. Special emphasis will also be placed on proper diagnosis and treatment of children with learning disabilities like dyslexia and other special needs. Their education will be mainstreamed as far as practicable with the full implementation of the inclusive education policy

c. introducing a District Integrated Social Services programme for children, families and vulnerable adults to consolidate the relevant health, education, and justice systems, as well as all social protection programmes

d. strengthening and enforcing regulations, and introducing national minimum standards for residential children’s homes, and

e. strengthening regulations and reforming the adoption and foster care regime and providing incentives for fostering at-risk children.

CHAPTER 3
GOVERNANCE, CORRUPTION AND PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. GOVERNANCE

The fundamental requirement for sustainable development is good governance. The NPP is irrevocably committed to the establishment of a solid, efficient machinery for good governance, comprising accountable government and respect for the rule of law and human rights.

To realise this, the NPP government will deepen the culture of the rule of law by:

a. upholding and promoting the separation of powers. The NPP government will make adequate provision to secure the independence of the Judiciary and will help to strengthen the institutional capacity of Parliament, and

b. promoting and instilling within the state security agencies an enhanced ethic and culture of respect for the rights and freedoms of citizens

The NPP will also deepen political participation by:

a. appointing women to at least 30% of available public office positions

b. bringing back the People’s Assemblies to encourage citizens to participate in government, and

c. ensuring that citizens and public bodies are fully aware of their respective duties and rights in the delivery of public service; and
empowering citizens to demand the quality of public service to which they are entitled.

II. CURRENT STATE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY

Ghana, a well-endowed country, has been brought to its knees and has been reduced to borrowing and begging from foreign creditors and donors to finance even its most mundane development needs. Corruption is what has brought this shame upon us all. Corruption holds back economic growth, increases cost of doing business, reduces revenue to the state, leads to capital flight and inflates the cost of running government. It results in a loss of legitimacy and respect for legally-constituted authority. Corruption demoralises honest people and fills them with uncertainty, mistrust and fear. It stifles initiative and creativity and dampens motivation. It undermines the merit system of rewards, appointments and success and it encourages mediocrity, laziness and incompetence.

Under the NDC administration, corruption has become widespread, heralding the entry of the phrase - CREATE, LOOT and SHARE - into the Ghanaian lexicon, introduced by the Supreme Court in a ruling on a corruption case.

The corruption under John Mahama’s NDC Government is exemplified by:

a. rampant contract price inflation

b. abuse of the procurement processes, with sole sourcing the most abused process

c. public accountability reduced to highlighting government projects, without accompanying monetary cost

d. anti-corruption institutions being underfunded

e. revelations of stealing and looting not investigated with potential culprits going unpunished, and finding shelter in the Office of the President in an open display of impunity

f. payments of dubious judgment debts and questionable settlements, and

g. flagrant nepotism and cronyism.

The Mahama-led NDC government pays lip service to the fight against corruption. There is no real commitment to fighting corruption as the Attorney General’s Office either refuses to prosecute or where there have been prosecutions, does so shoddily.

We cannot continue along this path if we are to build a secure, peaceful and prosperous society for ourselves and posterity. The NPP and its leadership commit to fighting corruption with renewed vigour, honesty and integrity. We intend to ensure that public funds are spent on their intended purposes and the people of Ghana get value for money in public expenditures. The NPP will fight corruption head-on through preventive, detective, corrective and punitive actions.

Our anti-corruption policy will be based on three key pillars: institutional reform, legislative reform, and attitudinal change/public education.

Some of the specific actions the NPP will undertake under these pillars are:

III. INSTITUTIONAL REFORM

a. Office of The Special Prosecutor

The Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) and the Economic and Organised Crime Office (EOCO) require the permission of the Attorney General to prosecute. The monopoly of prosecutorial authority by an Attorney-General, who is hired and fired by the President, has been singled out by governance experts as one of the key factors that stand in the way of using law enforcement and prosecution as a credible tool in the fight against corruption. Such institutional bottle-necks impede the fight against corruption.

To this end, we intend to establish, by an Act of Parliament, an Office of the Special Prosecutor, who will be independent of the Executive, to investigate and prosecute certain categories of cases and allegations of corruption and other criminal wrongdoing, including those involving alleged violations of the Public Procurement Act and cases implicating political officeholders and politicians.

b. Strengthening the Institutions of State

NPP will enhance accountability in governance by promoting the effective separation of powers. Adequate provision to secure the independence of the Judiciary will be made and we will help to strengthen the institutional capacity of Parliament to solidify parliamentary oversight of the Executive.

Furthermore, we shall require the Attorney General to report to Parliament annually on the potential liability of the State arising out of claims against the State. We shall support and provide all institutions whose mandates cover anti-corruption with enhanced financial resources to recruit, train, engage and retain a large number of technical personnel to investigate and educate against corruption.

c. Assets Declaration Regime

An NPP government will implement an effective Assets Declaration Regime by fostering a working environment for asset declaration that includes the following elements:

* the President shall, within 14 days, forward a list of appointments, made in pursuant of Chapter 24 of the Constitution, to the Auditor General

* effective monitoring of asset declaration, by amending the law to require the Auditor General to publish periodically the list of all persons appointed under Chapter 24 of the Constitution, who have declared or defaulted

* amend the law relating to asset declaration to provide for sanctions which may include forfeiture of appointment, and

* Parliament will be called upon to amend the law to provide for public disclosure of asset declarations.

d. Code of Conduct

As part of the fight against corruption, the NPP government shall enact, popularize and enforce a comprehensive code of conduct for public officials so as to give full meaning and effect to the provisions of Article 284 of the Constitution.

e. Statutory funds

The NPP will establish an automatic mechanism for transfer of statutory funds to designated agencies such as the Ghana Education Trust Fund (GETFund), District Assemblies Common Fund (DACF) and NHIS as stipulated by law.

IV. LEGISLATIVE AND OTHER REFORMS

The agenda of legislative reform will generally review the legal, regulatory and institutional framework for anti-corruption.

In order to adopt legislative measures that will operationalize the relevant articles on corruption in the UN Convention Against Corruption, the NPP will do the following:

a. amend the relevant sections of the Criminal Offences Act, 1960 (Act 29), particularly sections 3, 151, and 239-257, to make corruption a felony rather than a misdemeanour

b. reform laws to set time limits within which an appointing authority must fill any vacancy or confirm a person acting in that office where that institution has a watchdog role

c. ensure the passage of the Right to Information bill if the present Parliament delays in doing so

d. introduce legislation to improve prevention, detection, reporting, investigations and prosecution

e. propose a law for the establishment of the Office of the Special Prosecutor

f. strengthen institutions like Parliament, the Judiciary, and other state institutions, and resource them sufficiently to be effective

g. ensure the strict enforcement of the Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663)

h. ensure transparency by establishing a transaction price database, which will be periodically reviewed to conform to market trends

i. resource the Auditor General’s office to set up a Procurement Audit Unit to conduct value for money audits with the view to detecting and prosecuting corrupt practices

j. bring to an end the prevailing regime of impunity, where people found to have stolen or fraudulently benefited from public funds are merely requested by the Attorney General to refund same on their own terms or are sheltered at the Office of the President, and also ensure the implementation of the recommendations of the Auditor General and Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of Parliament.

V. ATTITUDINAL CHANGE/PUBLIC EDUCATION

The NPP intends to resource the National Commission on Civic Education (NCCE) to provide public education and sensitisation on the negative effects of corruption, as well as to initiate and sustain a national conversation on the values that should shape the transformation of the country. This should strengthen the citizen’s resolve to resist, condemn and report corruption and demand accountability.

Finally, the NPP in government will sponsor the establishment of an interactive website for public reporting of corrupt practices in accordance with the Whistle Blower’s Act, 2006 (Act 720).

CHAPTER 4
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

The NPP is committed to bringing governance to the doorsteps of the people. We will focus on effective and efficient decentralization through greater grassroots participation, better planning and improved service delivery in local communities.
Over the past eight years, the NDC, under John Mahama, has failed to add to the financial resources of the District Assemblies. Rather, his
government has instituted a practice by which a large portion of the DACF is deducted at source for spending by the Ministry. Only 33.3% of the allocated DACF is actually transferred for direct utilization by the Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs). This weakens
the effective functioning of local government.
The last NPP government improved human resource capacity and increased budgetary support to MMDAs. The District Assemblies Common Fund was increased from 5.0 to 7.5% of total national revenue. A District Development Fund was also established with a seed fund of US$25 million. Legal backing was given to the Institute of Local Government Studies as the key capacity-building institution, responsible for generating the requisite personnel to man local governments.

An NPP government will undertake the following measures to ensure that local governance and decentralization are enhanced:

I. POLITICAL DECENTRALISATION

NPP will:

a. oversee the direct election of Metropolitan, Municipal and District Chief Executives (MMDCEs) within 24 months of election into office, to coincide with the next District Assembly elections in
2019

b. strengthen the sub-structures of MMDAs through capacity building and adequate resource allocation

c. strengthen the role of traditional authorities within the local government system, and

d. improve allowances paid to assembly members.

II. LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICE AND CAPACITY BUILDING

NPP will:

a. review the Local Government Service regime and practice, to ensure that local level action is not stifled by top-heavy bureaucratic institutions, especially in recruitment and procurement, against the background of a seeming scheme of re-centralization under the recently established Local Government Service, and

b. upgrade the Tamale campus of Institute of Local Government Service (ILGS) into a modern state-of the-art institute to train local government practitioners and staff in northern Ghana.

III. FISCAL DECENTRALIZATION

NPP will ensure that fiscal decentralization is fully implemented through the following initiatives;

a. abolishing the current practice of central Government manipulation of the DACF through the procurement process

b. decentralizing and equipping the Land Valuation Board (LVB) to provide direct technical support on property valuation to MMDAs for enhanced revenue mobilization, and

c. ensuring the speedy enactment of the Municipal Finance Bill, initiated by the Kufuor-led NPP administration, into law. This law will provide space to MMDAs to access funds from the capital market for rapid socio economic development and partner the private sector to provide job opportunities to local people.

IV. SANITATION MANAGEMENT

The NPP will ensure the consolidation of all existing national sanitation policies, plans and programmes into a Comprehensive National Sanitation
Programme and Action Plan.

The NPP will establish a National Sanitation Fund to fund this Action Plan.

Sources of the Fund shall include:

a. allocations from the Consolidated Fund

b. contributions from sanitation related industries, and

c. sanitation related fines

The NPP will also promote recycling of refuse through the use of incentive packages.

CHAPTER 5
SECURITY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Ghanaians are becoming increasingly concerned about their security, due to the increasing levels of crime and lawlessness under the Mahama-led NDC government. Today, Ghanaians do not feel safe. The Mahama-led NDC government has failed the people of Ghana in terms of the security of the country and of its citizens. Our existing laws are largely not enforced, and when they are, they are done selectively, often with much interference from the Executive.

The NPP Government will secure peace and security for all Ghanaians. Under the NPP Government, Ghanaians will feel safe on the streets and in their homes. Ghanaians will go about their daily business in the secure knowledge that their persons, properties and lives are safe under an NPP Government. NPP believes that the strict enforcement of our existing laws by our security agencies, without selectivity, will go a long way to sanitize our nation, assuage the fears of the citizenry and dramatically transform our society.

In this regard, the next NPP government will ensure that all our security personnel are properly-trained, properly-resourced, and provided with incentives to enable them discharge professionally their duties and obligations fairly and effectively without any interference from the executive branch of government in order to make the country a safe place for all our citizens.

The NPP will ensure that our security personnel are also adequately prepared to deal with the emerging threats of terrorism and cybercrime, which will be another major priority of our government.

I. IMPROVING LIVING CONDITIONS OF SECURITY SERVICES

The NPP recognises that the conditions, under which the majority of our security services live, have become unacceptable. From inadequate spaces to poor sanitation, many of their barracks have not seen upgrades for decades. As part of our overall commitment to improving the living conditions of our security personnel, the NPP will roll out a National Barracks Regeneration Programme that will invest in rehabilitating and upgrading their living quarters across the country.

II. THE POLICE SERVICE

The NPP will resource our police to continue to maintain law and order and protect lives and property with the following measures:

a. review and restructure recruitment into our police service to stamp out the fraud and cronyism that have been introduced into this process by the Mahama-led NDC government

b. continue to recruit additional personnel, with increased recruitment of women, into the police service, as we work towards the target of meeting the U.N. ratio of 1:500 police to civilians

c. ensure that our marine police unit is expanded and resourced, and that it works in tandem with the Navy to deal effectively with protecting our offshore oil and gas installations, and tackling illegal activities such as pair trawling and drug trafficking in our territorial waters

d. provide the police with modern communication and policing equipment

e. encourage security awareness of the various communities through neighbourhood watch schemes

f. develop a comprehensive policy to enhance the Police’s capacity to tackle cyber-crimes and cyber security issues

g. invigorate highway patrols to combat highway robberies and reduce motor accidents on our roads

h. improve the current police visibility arrangements by strengthening community policing

i. build two new police hospitals at Sunyani and Bolgatanga to serve the health needs of police personnel

j. build 2 new police training schools

k. harmonise and standardise police training across the country

l. improve and resource all police training institutions, including the command college at Winneba, and

m. improve the training of CID personnel both locally and internationally.

III. THE ARMED FORCES

The NPP will continue to provide the Armed Forces with adequate and modern resources to enable them perform their core function of defending the territorial integrity of Ghana. The NPP will also enable them to meet their peacekeeping obligations, provide humanitarian services, including medical evacuation and to participate in national disaster relief, when they occur.

We constructed the second phase, and we will complete the third phase of the 37 Military Hospital project, as well as upgrade its equipment to meet modern medical challenges. We will also construct a new military hospital in Tamale to service the health needs of military personnel and their families in the northern sector of the country.

In addition, the NPP will:

a. improve institutions under the military, including the training schools for other ranks, and Military Academy and Training Schools (MATS), Armed Forces Recruitment Centre, Ghana Armed Forces Command and Staff College and Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Centre

b. protect military lands from encroachment, and

c. continue local and foreign training for Armed Forces personnel

IV. UN PEACEKEEPING MISSION

The NPP, under President Kufuor, in keeping with our tradition of enhancing the welfare of military personnel, increased the troop contribution allowance normally paid to the soldiers from US$16 to US$27 a day, an increase of about 69%. President Mills increased it by 11% to US$30. President Mahama
increased it by just US$1 to US$31, being a mere 3% increase, in all a total of 14% increase over the 8 years of the NDC government.

After announcing the US$1 increase, it was rejected by the military personnel, and under pressure, Mahama was forced to increase it by another US$4 to US$35. The NPP commits to adjusting upwards the allowances in line with new increases by the UN, and will ensure that personnel, who serve in UN Peacekeeping Missions are paid at their duty post.

V. PRISONS SERVCE

The NPP will take immediate steps to decongest our prisons, and introduce a system of separate dedicated prisons for remand and convicted inmates to serve as proper correction homes. We will submit a bill to Parliament to reform our prisons.

Areas of reform will include:

a. pre-trial detention

b. prison management

c. sentencing reform, including non-custodial sentences

d. social integration, and

e. health facilities

We will also invest in the overall welfare of Prisons Service personnel, including its civilian officers, by:

a. enhancing the training for the Service personnel

b. providing modern and strategic equipment to make service personnel more efficient

c. offering competitive remuneration to enable the Service attract the best personnel

d. improving the standards, quality, and number of accommodation for the Service

e. improving healthcare at the Prisons for prisoners, prison officers and civilian employees, and

f. building two Prison Service hospitals, one each in the Southern and Northern sectors of the country.

VI. FIRE SERVCE

NPP’s policy is to provide each district with a Fire Service station where none exists. Where there is one, the NPP will upgrade it as required to meet the minimum standards expected of a modern, well-equipped fire station.

Similar to other services, the NPP will invest in the overall welfare of the men and women of the Fire Service, by:

a. enhancing the training for the Service personnel

b. providing modern and strategic equipment to make them more efficient. In particular, for all locations that make them a necessity, the NPP will provide equipment for use on highrise buildings in
fire incidents, and

c. offering competitive remuneration to enable the Service attract the best personnel.

VII. IMMIGRATION SERVCE

As the principal service at our entry points, the Immigration Service is critical to the security of our borders and in the prevention of cross-border and international crime. Indeed, it is at the forefront of the regional effort to combat growing terrorism. Equally important, it is an agent for offering that traditional Ghanaian welcome that the country is known for to tourists and visitors to our country.

In recognition of their multiple roles, and also as part of the NPP’s aim to grow rapidly our tourism and hospitality sector, we shall pay particular attention to the training and incentivisation of  the personnel of the Immigration Service. In particular, we will offer extensive training in specialist areas in the growing areas of crime detection and prevention, customer service relations, and trends in global cross-border crimes and anti-terrorism tactics. We will also provide modern and strategic equipment to make them more efficient, as well as offering competitive remuneration to enable the Service attract the best personnel.

VIII. NARCOTICS AND THE ILLICIT DRUG TRADE

Increased use and the trade in illegal drugs are major threats to our nation and our youth. It is also an issue of national security, as Ghana has become a major transit point to the extent that the VVIP Lounge at Kotoka International Airport, Accra has been used to facilitate drug trafficking under the Mahama-led NDC government.

The NPP will introduce a robust and comprehensive anti-narcotic drug and anti-organised crime policy with severe sanctions and penalties to serve as deterrence for potential offenders.

Our overall plan will concentrate on six (6) key areas: education, prevention, collaboration, detection, sanctions and rehabilitation. We will educate the youth about the hazards of narcotic drugs and organized crime. Working with our international partners, we will institute measures to prevent hard drugs from being imported into the country, and also eliminate the country’s reputation as a trans-shipment point. We will strengthen the country’s detection institutions and systems.

IX. SMALL ARMS

The NPP will take all necessary measures to curb the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, and enforce laws on their illegal possession, manufacturing and trade. To improve the safety and security of our citizens, and to combat the use of small arms in conflicts, we will take the relevant steps to control effectively the ease of availability of small arms in the country. We will support the Small Arms and Light Weapons Board to streamline the manufacture, importation, sale and distribution of small arms in the country.

To achieve this objective, we will take the following measures:

a. regulate small arms transfers and sales activities

b. destroy surplus and confiscated weapons

c. curb the smuggling of small arms and light weapons into the country, and

d. ensure that the protocol on small arms and light weapons is incorporated into our domestic law.


CHAPTER 6
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

Since independence, Ghana has been held in high esteem in the comity of nations, thanks to its consistent show of leadership in international matters, especially within the West African region and on the African continent. Our foreign policy will be one of the principal agents of Ghana’s socioeconomic resurgence. The NPP will improve on the efficiency and effectiveness of our foreign missions. We will redirect their emphasis to the search for economic opportunities with the view to opening markets for Ghanaian goods, while attracting foreign investments into the Ghanaian economy.

To achieve this, the NPP will also review existing policies to take into account the new world order with respect to developments like Brexit, the emergence of China and other BRICS nations – Brazil, Russia, India and South Africa.

I. ECONOMIC DIPLOMACY

The NPP will prioritise the development of economic opportunities in our foreign policy, by opening up markets abroad for Ghanaian goods and services and attracting foreign investments. An important task of our diplomatic missions will be to link our businessmen with foreign counterparts in strategic alliances and partnerships to develop the private sector, and to market the country as an attractive destination for foreign investment. The Ministry will facilitate linkages between Ambassadors and High
Commissioners and MMDCEs with the view of maximising investment and trade opportunities for local authorities.

II. DEMOCRACY AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS

Under the Kufuor-led NPP government, Ghana was seen as the poster boy of the African rising narrative. Unfortunately, the country has lost this image. Our stature in the comity of nations has considerably diminished under the watch of the Mahama-led NDC government. The NPP will restore our lost image. The NPP is proud of its democratic heritage. We will support democracy and the growing trend towards democratisation in all parts of the world, especially in Africa. The NPP will support the strengthening of democratic governance, the rule of law, civil rights and political freedoms everywhere. We remain firmly committed to our membership of ECOWAS, the African Union (AU), NEPAD, La Francophonie, the Commonwealth and the UN. These organisations champion the cause of democracy, good governance, human rights and the rule of law. Ghana, under the NPP, will improve her stake and role in a strong and vibrant regional market and enhance our role in the activities of the AU.

III. MULTILATERALISM IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS

The NPP believes strongly that Ghana can defend its national interests, and maintain its sovereign independence, yet take decisions with its more powerful friends, partners and allies without deferring to them.

IV. GHANA AND ECOWAS

Recognising the advantages of an expanded market for intra-regional trade and economic co-operation, the NPP will work towards the realisation of all the objectives of ECOWAS, including working for the rapid establishment of an ECOWAS regional market. A strong and vibrant ECOWAS will not only be a stimulus for our economic development, but will also serve as a springboard for the realisation of an African Economic Community. The NPP government will encourage all groupings within the region to harmonise their objectives and operations with a view to facilitating rapidly the achievement of a united and strong West Africa as a basis for a united and strong Africa.

V. GHANA AND THE AFRICAN UNION (AU)

The NPP is fully committed to the objectives of the AU. We will do all in our power to make the Union work more efficiently and purposefully for the advancement of the African continent and its peoples, as stated in Agenda 2063. We will support the genuine aspirations of all African countries towards the realisation of Africa’s developmental objectives. The NPP will play an active part in the effort to create the African Continental Free Trade Area (ACFTA).

VI. GHANA AND THE COMMONWEALTH

Ghana’s ties to the governments and peoples of the Commonwealth are based on shared democratic values, history, language and common interests. We will not waver in upholding the tenets of the Commonwealth of Nations. Our continued membership of the Commonwealth will help foster greater international understanding, internalise best practices, and maximise our benefits through economic and technical cooperation and enhance international peace and security.

VII. GHANA AND THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION OF LA FRANCOPHONIE

The NPP will strengthen our ties with other members of the International Organisation of La Francophonie as a means of broadening our global reach in promoting our culture, tourism, trade and investment relations.

VIII. GHANA AND THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATION

Ghana will continue to play an active role in the UN and its specialised agencies as well as other affiliated agencies like ILO, FAO, UNICEF, World Bank and the IMF, and continue our commitment to attaining the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

IX. GHANAIANS LIVING ABROAD

A significant aspect of our foreign policy will be the promotion of the welfare of Ghanaians living in the diaspora. The NPP will endeavour to avail all our nationals living abroad due access to all provisions of laws that affect them. The NPP will continue to welcome back to the country Ghanaians living in the diaspora, as well as people of African descent and make them feel at home. We will develop close social and cultural ties with our kith and kin to our mutual benefit. The granting of dual citizenship has now restored the basic rights of Ghanaians living abroad, who, for one reason or another, had to adopt the citizenship of their host countries, and thereby lost their Ghanaian citizenship. Ghanaians living abroad are a critical part of the skills base that is needed for economic transformation. Rather than treating Ghanaians in the diaspora as second-class citizens, the NPP would put in place a policy framework that would encourage those, who may or may not have acquired other citizenships to bring their skills back home to assist in the development of our country. We shall expand further the opportunities that will allow Ghanaians living abroad to participate fully in our national discourse and benefit fully from the opportunities this nation has to offer.

In furtherance of this, we will help in the implementation of the Representation of The People’s Law, 1992 (PNDCL 284), as amended (alias ROPAL). The Diaspora Affairs Bureau will also be moved from the Foreign Ministry to the Office of the President to coordinate more effectively all matters affecting Ghanaians in the diaspora.

CHAPTER 7
YOUTH AND SPORTS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. YOUTH AGENDA

The youth constitute our major source of human capital for the transformational agenda of the country. Hence, all efforts should be made to employ their talents and skills for sustained growth of the economy. However, thanks to the toxic mixture of mismanagement, incompetence, and corruption, Ghanaian youth are, today, more than ever despondent.

Youth unemployment has reached crisis levels. Millions are unemployed, and have no access to capital to start businesses on their own. The NYEP (later reincarnated as GYEEDA, and now operating as YEA), established to bring relief, has collapsed under the weight of unprecedented corruption. It is obvious that it is the youth who will drive the discovery of new technologies, innovation and growth in the future. The NPP’s national youth policy is designed to help shape our youth for this role through developing leadership skills, quality education, entrepreneurship, job skills, creative skills and sports. We will create an enabling environment to build the capacity of our youth to take on more active roles in our country’s future and its development.

In pursuant of this, we will focus on the following:

a. setting up a Youth Development Authority (YDA) to harmonise and coordinate all government-sponsored youth initiatives and policies

b. establishing a Youth Enterprises Fund (YEF) that will provide funding and business development services for businesses owned by young entrepreneurs, especially start-ups

c. developing industrial parks in all regions targeting young Ghanaians, who start or wish to start small businesses, to provide them with access to workspaces, equipment and basic services, including electricity and water

d. implementing our proposed policy that ensures businesses established by young entrepreneurs under the Youth Enterprise Fund (YEF) participate in bidding for the 30% of the required 70% of Government-funded contracts to be sourced from entities owned by women, persons with disability and young persons

e. offering tax incentives to young entrepreneurs to encourage them to initiate start-ups

f. introducing tax credits and other incentives for companies that hire young graduates from tertiary institutions

g. concentrating on ICT training to create job avenues locally and offshore for our youth, and

h. instituting a Buy-Local policy for Government agencies with regards to ICT to ensure that applications and software are procured from local ICT firms.

II. SPORTS DEVELOPMENT

Nothing unites Ghanaians more than sports. The development of sports will be a key plank in galvanising our youth to appreciate nationhood and patriotism. Sports also has the potential of creating thousands of jobs, contributing significantly to our GDP and boosting the image of Ghana internationally.

The country is currently faced with a myriad of challenges in all areas of sports. Sports administration under the NDC, for the past eight years, now evokes images of chaos, confusion, massive fraud, endemic corruption and a culture of impunity. There is also inadequate investment in sports, resulting in the low motivation and morale of sports men and women in the country. The absence of an adequate legal framework for sports development and promotion also hinders the development of sports. The lack of a maintenance culture has led to the deterioration of sports infrastructure, and the neglect of school sports and other sporting disciplines have resulted in fallen standards.

Having built two new stadia in Tamale and Sekondi, and reconstructed the Accra, Kumasi and El Wak stadia, the NPP has a proven track-record in sports infrastructure development and we will continue with our vision of maintaining and building sports infrastructure. We will focus on building cordial relationships with the various sporting associations, whether autonomous or semi-autonomous, and ensure increased and dedicated funding for sports. We will also create an enabling environment that will provide the right incentives for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) in sports. Under the NPP, sports development and promotion will be prioritised.

The next NPP government will pursue the development of the sports sector by:

a. modernising sports through the provision of the right legal framework, by enacting the comprehensive Sports Bill initiated under President Kufuor

b. ensuring that District Assemblies fully participate in sports development and promotion

c. developing, in partnership with the private sector, Youth Development & Sports Centres in all Regions. Each centre will house a fully-equipped library, ICT hub, social hall, multi-purpose pitches and courts

d. completing the construction of the University of Ghana stadium started by the Kufuor-led NPP government

e. pursuing the vision of providing modern multi-sport stadia for the regions currently without one, namely Brong Ahafo, Eastern,
Upper East, Upper West and Volta

f. establishing a special unit at the Ministry to develop and promote sporting disciplines other than football, and to concentrate on the revival of school sports

g. putting in place an effective maintenance regime in partnership with the private sector

h. encouraging the private sector to provide funding for sports through the establishment of incentive packages, as well creating a Sports Fund to support the financing of sports

i. establishing three sports colleges in collaboration with the private sector

j. developing a Youth in Sports module to support young sportsmen and women and to create job opportunities for them

k. investing in a special Women-In-Sports programme to help unearth and support female athletes and sports talents across the country, and

l. awarding scholarships to promising young athletes so they can develop in the best of environments.

CHAPTER 8
TOURISM, CULTURE AND CREATIVE ARTS
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. TOURISM

Ghana possesses an extensive array of tourist attractions that include UN Heritage Sites, Forts and Castles, ancient mosques, slave trade artefacts, indigenous craft villages and various wildlife sanctuaries. With the tourism sector underdeveloped, however, we have been unable to exploit the huge potential that our tourist attractions offer in creating wealth and generating jobs, nor in marketing the country as an exciting destination for leisure, conference, sports, health and educational tourism.

The NPP government will focus on transforming the country into a major Meeting, Incentive, Conference, & Exhibition (MICE) centre, as well as on expanding the tourism sector, through investment, innovation, the pursuit of service excellence and meaningful partnerships. This will enable tourism to become a major revenue-generating sector that provides safe, memorable and enjoyable experience for tourists.

To achieve this, the NPP will:

a. aggressively develop our tourist sites to bring them to world-class standards, complete with the requisite amenities and facilities

b. pursue a deliberate marketing programme to promote our unique historical sites, flora and fauna, waterfalls and other cultural artefacts

c. take the staffing of these tourist sites and our hospitality industry as a whole seriously. To improve professionalism in the sector, we will partner with the private sector to set up a state-of-the-art hospitality teaching facility, with an operational hotel, classrooms, kitchens, library, and dormitories

d. encourage local communities to take ownership and be invested in the sustainability of tourist attractions in their localities

The NPP will champion a revenue-sharing programme to inject 5% of tourism revenues from fees of well-developed tourist attractions into local community projects

e. transform the Ghana Tourist Authority into a modern, efficient research and marketing institution with the necessary technical resources and funds to help project the image of Ghana as a globally-recognized tourism brand

f. give priority to high-impact facilities that have the potential to draw more patrons and increase traffic to tourist venues, by providing the incentives for private sector investors to invest in new tourism facilities and upgrade existing ones, such as beach resorts, quality hotels, safaris, heritage villages and fun parks

g. promote domestic tourism, by making it an aggressive plank of our tourism strategy with a marketing drive centred on entrenching a tourism culture among Ghanaians

h. reactivate and resource the Ghana Museums and Monuments Board to function effectively as a repository of both our cultural and historical records

i. to conserve properly our natural tourist attractions, pursue an ecotourism policy that enables us make these sites available whilst protecting the ecosystem, and

j. invest in Tourism IT as an enabler, to improve knowledge and the sharing of information about tourism opportunities in the country.

II. CULTURE

Culture is the very foundation of society and a country’s strength is built on its culture. Ghana has one of the richest and most vibrant cultures in the world. Our foods, our languages, our music, our fabrics, the rich, colourful kente cloth, the smock and the Adinkra symbols are some of the distinctive symbols of what identifies us and gives us confidence in ourselves.

The NPP will give the Arts and Culture Industry the requisite attention and incentives to flourish and to also create jobs and wealth for our people. The Culture Policy, developed and adopted under the Kufuor government, will be reviewed and actively implemented to give our culture pride of place in our national development. We will build a detailed inventory of all our cultural assets, so the nation has a database of these assets. This inventory will include all of Ghana’s tangible assets, like the Larabanga mosque, and intangible cultural assets like rites of passage and values and belief systems, which are in danger of disappearing completely with aging traditional custodians.

The Copyright Act 2005 (Act 690), among other provisions, provides for the protection of Adinkra symbols and the older Kente designs as expression of folklore. The NPP will ensure that the provisions regarding the protection of Kente and Adinkra designs are strictly enforced against illicit exploitation by foreign interests, to enable the country maximize revenue through the proper marketing of these heirlooms.

Government is by far the largest procurer of goods and services in the country. An NPP government will use its purchasing power to promote Made-in-Ghana goods and services.

III. CREATIVE ARTS

With the Creative Arts Sector being perennially under-resourced, it has not blossomed enough to ensure the country’s creative arts professionals are able to make a comfortable living off their work. The sector has the potential to contribute greatly to GDP growth. As such, the NPP will focus on supporting the sector to enable it realize its full potential for generating wealth for its practitioners, create jobs and grow the economy.

To make available funds to modernize and develop the sector, we will establish a Creative Arts Fund. Nothing demoralizes a creative arts professional more than when intellectual property is stolen and misused with no consequences for the copyright thief. The NPP will collaborate with the Chief Justice to create a Division of the High Court, focusing on the Creative Arts to deal with all matters relating to intellectual property rights, complete with a dedicated enforcement unit.

To provide an effective interface with Government and other key stakeholders, the NPP will establish a Creative Arts Council to coordinate and harmonize the various interests and fragmented associations into a well-functioning body to protect the interests of members. We will educate the public on copyright laws and provide the necessary framework for payment of appropriate royalties for creative works. The NPP will collaborate with private sector interests to acquire the technology and equipment needed to log creative works, in order to determine true and deserved royalties.

In order to stimulate an interest in the arts in young people, we will promote regional and district literature, music, dance and drama competitions, particularly in schools and colleges. We will pursue the construction of modern large seating theatres in every regional capital except Accra, beginning with Takoradi, Tamale and Kumasi, as well as setting up an additional Copyright Office in Tamale to cater for the northern sector in addition to the existing ones in Accra and Kumasi.

CHAPTER 9
CHIEFTAINCY, RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS AND CIVIL SOCIETY
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM

I. CHIEFTAINCY

The NPP will give due deference to Chiefs as the embodiment of the history and traditions of our people and will support the Chieftaincy institution to preserve, sustain and employ the traditional and cultural values, as well as practices that accelerate wealth creation and social harmony for total development.
Recognising the indispensable role of Chiefs in local government and their existence as symbols of traditional authority, we will support our Chiefs to provide the leadership and focus for local and district development. In this regard, the NPP will ensure the regular and prompt release of Consolidated Funds disbursements due to Chiefs, to enable them carry out their functions.

The NPP will also:

a. ensure the prompt payment of royalties due Chiefs, Queen Mothers and Traditional Councils

b. provide government support to the institution of Chieftaincy in the performance of their duties, their evolution and further modernization

c. support the National House of Chiefs to codify and systematize traditional laws and culture

d. involve Chiefs, Queen Mothers and Traditional Authorities in the afforestation and greening of Ghana with the support of the Forestry Commission

e. foster a collaboration of Government agencies and traditional leaders that will centre on the protection of water bodies and conservation of the environment

f. forge a new and formal collaboration between Chiefs, Queen Mothers and Traditional Authorities with NADMO, so that relief assistance can be better managed in our local communities during natural disasters and other emergencies, and

g. consult traditional authorities on appointments to local government institutions.

II. RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS

The NPP recognizes the special role religious organisations play in the development of the nation. Religious bodies have been in partnership with the Ghanaian people in the provision of education, health facilities and moral upbringing for nearly two hundred years. The NPP will continue to engage actively religious organizations as the leading moral-cultural institutions that have a key role in moulding the character and conduct of our citizens. We appreciate the value of the involvement of religious organisations in the management of faith-based schools and we will explore the possibility of enhancing their involvement.

We also acknowledge the important role of the mission hospitals in our healthcare system, especially in the rural areas. The NPP will therefore ensure that religious bodies in the health sector receive their NHIS payments promptly and commits to payments of existing debts expeditiously.

III. CIVIL SOCIETY AND CHARITY ORGANISATIONS

Civil Society in Ghana plays a significant role in governance and development. Right from before independence, voluntary groups, associations and organisations were involved in all sectors of Ghanaian life. An NPP government will launch a new era of cooperation and collaboration with civil society to improve governance and enhance the well-being of Ghanaians. We will work to ensure that the community develops and thrives.

The NPP will create the enabling legislative and economic environment for philanthropy to blossom and promote a new era of giving, knowing that a prosperous Ghana makes it easier for individuals and organisations to support civil society. We will concentrate on interventions that will unleash the potential of all, including the vulnerable, weak and excluded, particularly women, children and PLWDs. We will protect their rights and eradicate or reform harmful, inhumane and inimical cultural and traditional practices.

CONCLUSION

The solutions we have set out in this document have been well-considered. They are a response to the real problems faced by the Ghanaian people as a result of the mismanagement, incompetence and corruption of the Mahama-led NDC government. This Manifesto is our commitment to the people of Ghana. It is a social contract between ourselves and the people of Ghana. We aim to restore hope and to get the country back to working again and relieve the hardships of our people. The plans we have set out are for the long term sustainable development of our country. With the help of the Almighty God, the NPP will build in Ghana the most people friendly and the most business friendly economy in Africa, which will create prosperity for the great majority of our people, and thereby secure the stability of our society and the peace of the nation.

We have an excellent team of men and women who are ready and eager to serve our beloved Ghana. We have a well-thought out programme, and we have a track record of good performance in government. So support us and together, let’s get Ghana working again.

The future is bright.

God bless Ghana, God bless us all.
NEW PATRIOTIC PARTY
DEVELOPMENT IN FREEDOM



End of manifesto
