
FOREWORD

Fellow Ghanaians,

On 25th February 2012 a determined, progressive group of like-minded men and women from all over the country held a convention to outdoor a focused, vibrant, independent-minded and progressive Political Movement. We named our Movement the Progressive People's Party (PPP).

Ever since that day, the sun has been shining brightly in Ghana. We have worked selflessly to organise a credible, united, disciplined political party. We have worked tirelessly towards visibility and great strength everywhere in Ghana. We have prepared a clear, specific Platform for Accelerated Change that we will use to deliver world class education, healthcare and jobs to the Ghanaian society in our lifetime. We will start this transformation in Ghana with competent and incorruptible leadership.

Our promise to Ghanaians is that if you vote for the PPP to win power, in four years, we will transform the social and economic fabric of the nation to facilitate the creation of millions of jobs our people are looking for. We stand on the platform of Jobs, Jobs, Jobs, for every Ghanaian. The PPP wants to form a union with teachers to provide high quality free, compulsory and continuous education from the kindergarten to senior high school that will be the foundation for job creation in Ghana.

The end game is to get our people well prepared for the millions of high grade jobs that the PPP will inject into the Ghanaian economy. Ours is quality education with a purpose. From today, when you hear PPP, think Jobs, Prosperity and Peace. When you tell your mother, brother, colleague or classmate to vote for PPP and they ask you why, simply tell them, it is time to change our level of prosperity from third world to first world through competent incorruptible leadership.

Awake to Competent Leadership Awake to Incorruptible Leadership (Leadership that is not corrupt). Awake to Education, Health and Jobs for Every Ghanaian!

PKN Papa Kwesi Nduom Presidential Candidate.

CONTENTS

Foreword 01

A United, Empowered People in an Inclusive Society

03

PPP's Affirmative Action for Women & PWD's

05

Our Commitment to the People of Ghana

07

Our Political Platform

09

Working Together

24
CHAPTER 1

A United, Empowered People in an Inclusive Society:

True progress cannot be obtained without a unified Ghana. The PPP is asking for your votes so that we can create an inclusive, united Ghanaian society ­ Team Ghana. It is this new national unity that will reinvent Ghana. We, promise to build one solid Team Ghana by reinventing our Ghanaian selves, our attitudes and our way of life. The Progressive People's Party has arrived amidst massive changes to the Ghanaian Nation.

The vast majority of our population is under 35 years old. We have millions of young men and women desperate to get better healthcare, education and jobs. We know, for certain, that the Ghanaian people are sitting on top of trillions of dollars of Gold, Oil, Bauxite, Iron Ore, Manganese, Diamonds and vast tracts of fertile land desperate for simple irrigation. For the first time in the fourth republic, it is clear that we have the youthful demand and the bountiful resources to be used to dramatically improve education, healthcare and jobs. But we cannot benefit from these natural resources until Ghana has leadership that is truly democratic and does not aim to be an elected dictatorship. Ours is a leadership that is prepared to give some of its power to the people in order to unleash the energy of self-determination. The Progressive People's Party promises to give power back to the people to ensure broad national development and prosperity.

In these times of dramatic economic and social change, one thing has remained constant ­ a toxic, winner-takes-all political culture that has a deadly vice grip on the throats of our people. If we do not take concrete, sure steps away from this political culture, we will remain a nation made poor by leaders who just want to win power for the sake of winning power to further their aims of self-enrichment.

The PPP has emerged with the courage to stand up and say we are not just here to give empty promises to win power. We will not abuse the name of the Lord with vain prophesies. We will not proclaim that we are not corrupt, yet refuse to disclose our taxes, assets, health status and sources of party funding.

We are here to let every single Ghanaian know that if you vote for the PPP, you, as a Ghanaian citizen will win power, whether you are Christian, Muslim, male or female, young or old; or Living with Disability. We are here to let you know that if PPP wins this election, every single individual that votes will be a guaranteed winner, no matter which political party you voted for.

You will win power because the PPP believes that no political party can bring true progress to Ghana unless we share power with the people. Together, we can use the power of our individual votes to destroy the winner-takes-all, elected dictatorship established by the 1992 constitution. We will reform our constitution to strengthen parliament, elect district, municipal and metropolitan chief executives and create a strong independent public prosecutor to root out government corruption. In addition, the PPP gives a firm, unshakable promise to work with Parliament to pass the Right to Information Bill to bring transparency and encourage accountability in government.

To move Ghana forward, we, the people of Ghana, must vote to constrain the absolute power of the President. So far, the PPP is the only political party bold enough to pledge to reform the constitution in its first term to ensure effective democracy by removing the aspects of the 1992 constitution that were designed to perpetuate a winner-takes-all ruling party which promotes corruption. The PPP wants your votes to gain the authority to make it happen. Ghana desperately needs to upgrade its political system to match the strides that our economy and society can make in the 4th Republic. The PPP is offering a bold and transformational change that will do away with the current intensely exclusionary political system. This is the change that the PPP is offering you in the 2016 elections.

CHAPTER 2

PPP's Affirmative Action for Women & PWDs

Affirmative action is about building skills, providing training and working diligently to guarantee seats and positions to make it possible to break male domination in the legislature, executive and judiciary.

If you vote for the PPP we promise to rally all Ghanaians to work harder and more diligently to implement affirmative action policies and programmes to give our women and persons with disabilities, opportunities to develop their potentials in life.

Specifically,

i. Our compulsory education policy for all of our children from kindergarten to senior high school will ensure that our girls receive a decent education just as the boys. Education as a great equalizer will provide equal opportunity in life to our women and persons with disabilities.

ii. The PPP has actively encouraged women to become parliamentary candidates. Affirmative action in politics cannot be done only by reducing nomination fees.

iii. We will put into place the Women's Enterprise Development Agency to train, encourage and promote the growth and development of women entrepreneurs in the country. This will include technical assistance, low interest loans and the setting aside of portions of government contracts to enterprises founded and managed by women and persons with disabilities.

iv. The PPP will ensure the passage of the Spousal Property Rights Bill within six months of assuming office if it is not passed before January 7, 2017.


Affirmative Action for People With Disabilities (PWDs):

We pledge to continue to encourage people living with disability in our society to embrace the progressive, humanistic and common sense approach of the PPP to solving problems. Ghana has very few people with disability working as business women and men, nurses, traders, teachers, doctors, lawyers, bankers, ministers, members of parliament and heads of state institutions etc. because of a lack of political will to put PWDs in such positions. We will change that immediately we come into power in 2017.

Specifically,

i. We will work with the Ghana Federation of the Disabled (GFD) to ensure that children with disability are given all the special facilities they need to study under our compulsory education policy.

ii. We will sanction healthcare professionals who intimidate PWD patients at their facilities while corrective surgeries would be performed for children free of charge, when required and as early as possible under the NHIS.

iii. We will ensure that all MDAs will make public facilities and services accessible to PWDs as well as make Legal Aid Services free and accessible for all PWDs.

iv. We will also ensure the full enforcement of the laws governing accessibility to PWDs in all public and commercial buildings.

CHAPTER 3

Our Commitment to the People of Ghana:

Over the past 24 years, two political parties, have tried their best and applied their "property owning" and "social democrat" ideologies to the country's problems. Theirs have been change of the slow, incremental kind which sometimes has led to a "one foot forward and one foot backward" experience. Under these two parties, corruption has become unprecedented.

Our orientation and our core beliefs about the world we live in are Progressive. This means we believe in broad-based human progress that is felt by the people. We believe that under our leadership, Ghana shall move from a third world nation to a first world nation by working with a great sense of duty and urgency within one generation.

We believe in Ghanaian excellence. We believe in Ghanaian prosperity. We believe in all of the Ghanaian people. Our pact with you is that, once elected, we will fight for dramatically accelerated developmental progress. We will fight to move Ghana away from the maintenance of mediocrity, the culture of indiscipline, the constant failure of leadership, the cruelty of resource mismanagement and the tragedy of low expectations for developing African nations such as Ghana.

Forgotten Ghana:

There is no better Ghana anywhere in the country. While people sit in air-conditioned offices and media houses to engage in endless arguments over statistics, the people out there are suffering from the slow pace of development. The past governments were given the mandate to end poverty in all forms and they have failed. The PPP insists that the past governments have failed because the people are still drinking disease infected water and they are driving on dangerous roads. They are saddled with low quality of education, poor housing, preventable diseases and very, very high unemployment. Out there in the country, there is no hope for a productive and prosperous Ghana. In many of these areas their experience has not changed in the last 24 years. Communities such as Gizaa, Zaare, Wulensi, Widana, Awaso, Pudia, Agortoe, Efutu Mampong, Amanfro and Obom, and many more comprise a "Forgotten Ghana" that we can no longer afford to neglect. Ghanaians are looking for redemption and the PPP has made itself abundantly available, running to the rescue of our people. We encourage all Ghanaians to in turn embrace the safe haven offered by the PPP. We have reviewed this unfortunate situation and crafted our solutions to the problems confronting our nation and its people. The PPP is offering sustainable development that will be felt by everyone through the savings we make by fighting corruption.