FOREWORD

Fellow Ghanaians,

On 25th February 2012 a determined, progressive group of like-minded men and women from all over the country held a convention to outdoor a focused, vibrant, independent-minded and progressive Political Movement. We named our Movement the Progressive People's Party (PPP).

Ever since that day, the sun has been shining brightly in Ghana. We have worked selflessly to organise a credible, united, disciplined political party. We have worked tirelessly towards visibility and great strength everywhere in Ghana. We have prepared a clear, specific Platform for Accelerated Change that we will use to deliver world class education, healthcare and jobs to the Ghanaian society in our lifetime. We will start this transformation in Ghana with competent and incorruptible leadership.

Our promise to Ghanaians is that if you vote for the PPP to win power, in four years, we will transform the social and economic fabric of the nation to facilitate the creation of millions of jobs our people are looking for. We stand on the platform of Jobs, Jobs, Jobs, for every Ghanaian. The PPP wants to form a union with teachers to provide high quality free, compulsory and continuous education from the kindergarten to senior high school that will be the foundation for job creation in Ghana.

The end game is to get our people well prepared for the millions of high grade jobs that the PPP will inject into the Ghanaian economy. Ours is quality education with a purpose. From today, when you hear PPP, think Jobs, Prosperity and Peace. When you tell your mother, brother, colleague or classmate to vote for PPP and they ask you why, simply tell them, it is time to change our level of prosperity from third world to first world through competent incorruptible leadership.

Awake to Competent Leadership Awake to Incorruptible Leadership (Leadership that is not corrupt). Awake to Education, Health and Jobs for Every Ghanaian!

PKN Papa Kwesi Nduom Presidential Candidate.

CONTENTS

Foreword 01

A United, Empowered People in an Inclusive Society

03

PPP's Affirmative Action for Women & PWD's

05

Our Commitment to the People of Ghana

07

Our Political Platform

09

Working Together

24


Chapter 1

A United, Empowered People in an Inclusive Society:

True progress cannot be obtained without a unified Ghana. The PPP is asking for your votes so that we can create an inclusive, united Ghanaian society ­ Team Ghana. It is this new national unity that will reinvent Ghana. We, promise to build one solid Team Ghana by reinventing our Ghanaian selves, our attitudes and our way of life. The Progressive People's Party has arrived amidst massive changes to the Ghanaian Nation.

The vast majority of our population is under 35 years old. We have millions of young men and women desperate to get better healthcare, education and jobs. We know, for certain, that the Ghanaian people are sitting on top of trillions of dollars of Gold, Oil, Bauxite, Iron Ore, Manganese, Diamonds and vast tracts of fertile land desperate for simple irrigation. For the first time in the fourth republic, it is clear that we have the youthful demand and the bountiful resources to be used to dramatically improve education, healthcare and jobs. But we cannot benefit from these natural resources until Ghana has leadership that is truly democratic and does not aim to be an elected dictatorship. Ours is a leadership that is prepared to give some of its power to the people in order to unleash the energy of self-determination. The Progressive People's Party promises to give power back to the people to ensure broad national development and prosperity.

In these times of dramatic economic and social change, one thing has remained constant ­ a toxic, winner-takes-all political culture that has a deadly vice grip on the throats of our people. If we do not take concrete, sure steps away from this political culture, we will remain a nation made poor by leaders who just want to win power for the sake of winning power to further their aims of self-enrichment.

The PPP has emerged with the courage to stand up and say we are not just here to give empty promises to win power. We will not abuse the name of the Lord with vain prophesies. We will not proclaim that we are not corrupt, yet refuse to disclose our taxes, assets, health status and sources of party funding.

We are here to let every single Ghanaian know that if you vote for the PPP, you, as a Ghanaian citizen will win power, whether you are Christian, Muslim, male or female, young or old; or Living with Disability. We are here to let you know that if PPP wins this election, every single individual that votes will be a guaranteed winner, no matter which political party you voted for.

You will win power because the PPP believes that no political party can bring true progress to Ghana unless we share power with the people. Together, we can use the power of our individual votes to destroy the winner-takes-all, elected dictatorship established by the 1992 constitution. We will reform our constitution to strengthen parliament, elect district, municipal and metropolitan chief executives and create a strong independent public prosecutor to root out government corruption. In addition, the PPP gives a firm, unshakable promise to work with Parliament to pass the Right to Information Bill to bring transparency and encourage accountability in government.

To move Ghana forward, we, the people of Ghana, must vote to constrain the absolute power of the President. So far, the PPP is the only political party bold enough to pledge to reform the constitution in its first term to ensure effective democracy by removing the aspects of the 1992 constitution that were designed to perpetuate a winner-takes-all ruling party which promotes corruption. The PPP wants your votes to gain the authority to make it happen. Ghana desperately needs to upgrade its political system to match the strides that our economy and society can make in the 4th Republic. The PPP is offering a bold and transformational change that will do away with the current intensely exclusionary political system. This is the change that the PPP is offering you in the 2016 elections.

Chapter 2

PPP's Affirmative Action for Women & PWDs

Affirmative action is about building skills, providing training and working diligently to guarantee seats and positions to make it possible to break male domination in the legislature, executive and judiciary.

If you vote for the PPP we promise to rally all Ghanaians to work harder and more diligently to implement affirmative action policies and programmes to give our women and persons with disabilities, opportunities to develop their potentials in life.

Specifically,

i. Our compulsory education policy for all of our children from kindergarten to senior high school will ensure that our girls receive a decent education just as the boys. Education as a great equalizer will provide equal opportunity in life to our women and persons with disabilities.

ii. The PPP has actively encouraged women to become parliamentary candidates. Affirmative action in politics cannot be done only by reducing nomination fees.

iii. We will put into place the Women's Enterprise Development Agency to train, encourage and promote the growth and development of women entrepreneurs in the country. This will include technical assistance, low interest loans and the setting aside of portions of government contracts to enterprises founded and managed by women and persons with disabilities.

iv. The PPP will ensure the passage of the Spousal Property Rights Bill within six months of assuming office if it is not passed before January 7, 2017.


Affirmative Action for People With Disabilities (PWDs):

We pledge to continue to encourage people living with disability in our society to embrace the progressive, humanistic and common sense approach of the PPP to solving problems. Ghana has very few people with disability working as business women and men, nurses, traders, teachers, doctors, lawyers, bankers, ministers, members of parliament and heads of state institutions etc. because of a lack of political will to put PWDs in such positions. We will change that immediately we come into power in 2017.

Specifically,

i. We will work with the Ghana Federation of the Disabled (GFD) to ensure that children with disability are given all the special facilities they need to study under our compulsory education policy.

ii. We will sanction healthcare professionals who intimidate PWD patients at their facilities while corrective surgeries would be performed for children free of charge, when required and as early as possible under the NHIS.

iii. We will ensure that all MDAs will make public facilities and services accessible to PWDs as well as make Legal Aid Services free and accessible for all PWDs.

iv. We will also ensure the full enforcement of the laws governing accessibility to PWDs in all public and commercial buildings.

Chapter 3

Our Commitment to the People of Ghana:

Over the past 24 years, two political parties, have tried their best and applied their "property owning" and "social democrat" ideologies to the country's problems. Theirs have been change of the slow, incremental kind which sometimes has led to a "one foot forward and one foot backward" experience. Under these two parties, corruption has become unprecedented.

Our orientation and our core beliefs about the world we live in are Progressive. This means we believe in broad-based human progress that is felt by the people. We believe that under our leadership, Ghana shall move from a third world nation to a first world nation by working with a great sense of duty and urgency within one generation.

We believe in Ghanaian excellence. We believe in Ghanaian prosperity. We believe in all of the Ghanaian people. Our pact with you is that, once elected, we will fight for dramatically accelerated developmental progress. We will fight to move Ghana away from the maintenance of mediocrity, the culture of indiscipline, the constant failure of leadership, the cruelty of resource mismanagement and the tragedy of low expectations for developing African nations such as Ghana.

Forgotten Ghana:

There is no better Ghana anywhere in the country. While people sit in air-conditioned offices and media houses to engage in endless arguments over statistics, the people out there are suffering from the slow pace of development. The past governments were given the mandate to end poverty in all forms and they have failed. The PPP insists that the past governments have failed because the people are still drinking disease infected water and they are driving on dangerous roads. They are saddled with low quality of education, poor housing, preventable diseases and very, very high unemployment. Out there in the country, there is no hope for a productive and prosperous Ghana. In many of these areas their experience has not changed in the last 24 years. Communities such as Gizaa, Zaare, Wulensi, Widana, Awaso, Pudia, Agortoe, Efutu Mampong, Amanfro and Obom, and many more comprise a "Forgotten Ghana" that we can no longer afford to neglect. Ghanaians are looking for redemption and the PPP has made itself abundantly available, running to the rescue of our people. We encourage all Ghanaians to in turn embrace the safe haven offered by the PPP. We have reviewed this unfortunate situation and crafted our solutions to the problems confronting our nation and its people. The PPP is offering sustainable development that will be felt by everyone through the savings we make by fighting corruption.

Chapter 4

Our Political Platform:

We are pleased to present to you the PPP Political Platform for the 2016 elections. Ours is a simple, yet powerful agenda. We have resisted the temptation to produce a huge book of empty promises that cannot be implemented. Ghanaians have been disappointed enough times in this Fourth Republic. Ghana already has the Directive Principles of State Policies in our Constitution to guide our agenda, policies and programmes.

To that end, the PPP seeks the opportunity to implement an efficient Agenda for Accelerated Change that is built on Incorruptible Leadership, Education, Healthcare and Jobs. We will implement the Agenda in the spirit of inclusiveness that will enable us to use the best Ghanaians; full participation of women, youth and people living with disabilities; and above all a leadership that is incorruptible. We will tackle corruption head on, to eliminate waste, make savings and double government revenue which we will use to pay for our transformational initiatives in education, healthcare and job creation. We will also ensure cost-savings through diligence to augment our development budget.

I. Just and Disciplined Society:

The PPP will create a just and disciplined society with a passion for excellence within ten years and with science and technology as the cornerstone, become a higher level middle income country. This just society will ensure the implementation of existing laws intended to make life profitable for every Ghanaian including persons living with disability. Enforcement of laws, application of sanctions, implementation of technology driven policies for accelerated growth, such as full implementation of National Identification Card system, for efficiency in public service delivery, use of database to fight crime, facilitate housing and planning, effective election management systems, licenses and permits etc.

II. Agriculture:

The society we will create will modernize agriculture and provide a market to sustain our farmers and fishermen. We will use the state's purchasing power to provide the assurance that the labor of our farmers and fishermen will not be in vain. We will construct good roads that link farms to market centres to ensure that our farmers are able to transport their produce for sale easily, as one way of reducing poverty.

Of equal importance is the need to provide ready markets for our farmers and fishermen to ensure that they are encouraged year on year to produce even more. One way to provide ready market is to ensure that all basic schools on the school feeding program as well as Senior High Schools patronize strictly, made in Ghana commodities for cooking. In Ghana today, we leave our agricultural products to rot due to our poor infrastructure ­ as happens in Biri-Pro in the Ashanti Region and many, many other villages in the country. We will institute an innovative farm to school table policy that will ensure that the freshest, natural produce from our farms will be fed to our youth on a daily basis to change the face of the current school feeding programme which is corruption ridden. Ministries, Departments and Agencies will also be instructed to consume strictly `Made in Ghana' food and beverages for refreshments at all their programs.

The PPP will use the state's purchasing power to create a ready market for our farmers. The PPP will empower and resource the national food buffer company with adequate warehousing facilities in every region to carry out this all important mandate. Perishable products such as tomatoes will receive special storage facilities to prevent post-harvest losses. Also, a PPP government will ensure that all tomato factories become viable through expert advice and technical assistance to provide ready markets for our tomato farmers.

A PPP administration will ensure the existence of low interest loans and technical assistance to our farmers to improve their businesses. This will be done through private, public partnership arrangements.

A PPP government will revive the almost defunct Kwadaso Agricultural College and collaborate more with institutions such as the University College of Agriculture at BUNSO, University of Ghana, the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, the University of Development Studies and others to enable Senior High School graduates to pursue courses in Agriculture extension services, soil management, etc. to fill the manpower gap in this sector.

III. Reform and Strengthen State Institutions:

The PPP will reform state institutions, make government efficient and raise revenue to be able to pay public servants well to motivate them to facilitate the work of the private sector and Ghanaian society in general. The PPP will work to change portions of the Constitution to abolish the provision that allows Ministers of State to also serve as Members of Parliament.

We believe that this move will make available for governance a large pool of qualified, experienced Ghanaian talent whose expertise is currently unused and therefore lost to Ghana. This we will aim to complete in one term of office. Concurrent with this objective will be a solid determination to give Parliament the facilities and resources needed to pass good laws and scrutinize the proposals submitted by the Executive effectively.

We will create a Ministry of Public Service to lead the task of continuous reform and modernisation of state institutions. A PPP Administration will reduce the number of ministers of state to 40 and will rely on professional civil and local servants to ensure efficient administration.

[graphic:
 
10 POINT AGENDA

Give Power to the People for Development

Strengthen Parliament to perform its legislative duties effectively

Provide Better Health Care and Cleaner Environment

Attack Crime, the Drug Trade and Corruption

Create a just and disciplined society

Improve the Performance of Government

Provide Quality Education for Every Ghanaian Child

Provide Energy for Industrialisation and Rapid Development

Empower the Diaspora

Create Jobs

]

Share Power with the People:

The PPP will work to change portions of the Constitution to enable the election of all District Assembly Members and District/Municipal/ Metropolitan Chief Executives to ensure local accountability, elimination of corruption and rapid development. This we will do in one term of office. If citizens are capable of electing the president and members of parliament, they should be credited with the wisdom to decide who governs them at the local government level.

IV. Education:

The PPP will provide Quality Education for Every Ghanaian Child. We will standardize school facilities from kindergarten to Senior High, with libraries, toilets, classrooms, kitchen, housing for teachers, playground, etc.: and Ensure Free and Compulsory education in public schools from Kindergarten to Senior (including ICT training). We will deploy an "Education Police" to enforce the compulsory aspect of our policy. An integral part of this objective will be an objective to significantly increase vocational training so that all school leavers gain employable skills.

Sports: This education policy vision includes, a comprehensive sports programme to instil discipline and promote better health. The comprehensive sports programme will ensure that with government support, we begin to develop future world and Olympic champions. Our performances at successive Olympic Games have not been fitting of a country of our stature. We will upgrade the current Accra Sports Stadium to a world class standard.

The PPP policy recognizes the need to expand educational facilities and to enable every child's demand for access to be met. The PPP policy will ensure that a "free Senior High School education" is a right to all children and does not perpetuate the privilege reality of today where only those who "manage" to pass the BECE examination and secure a place advance to the High School level. Ours is the policy that is comprehensive and consistent with standards set by countries that have overcome underdevelopment and poverty in the world. When we put back compulsory in education in Ghana, we will set our children on a sure path to success in life.

To ensure success in our overall education policy, we will invest in the building of complete school compounds across the country including housing for teachers and the upgrading of teacher training institutions. Science, Technology, English, Math and Arts will be at the heart of our efforts. With this, no child living with disability, poor or rich, male or female would be left behind.

It is said that "If you think education is expensive, try ignorance". Education is a better driver of a nation's economy than gold, oil, gas and such other natural resources. Without it our natural resources become huge burdens on all citizens. The PPP is determined to give priority to the implementation of our policy in national budgets. We will fund the free, compulsory, continuous education vision through government revenue primarily by reducing waste, competent administration and checking corruption.

We believe that the framers of our 1992 Constitution shared our belief that the goal of ensuring an educated and knowledgeable people is not negotiable. It is for this reason that Chapter Six of the Constitution - Directive Principles of State Policy makes clear the policy to be implemented by government in the area of education.

While our political platform includes practical solutions for a broader variety of issues facing Ghana, at the core of Ghana's unfulfilled potential is a failure to take decisive policy actions to provide Ghanaians dramatically improved education, healthcare and jobs. We need to support Ghanaian entrepreneurial champions who create jobs, make education from kindergarten, not just primary school to the end of senior high school free AND COMPULSORY meaning that parents will sleep easy knowing that if their child leaves school to go to the beach or play football, they will be found by the education police and brought back to class.

V.  Energy for Industrialisation and Rapid Development:

The PPP will provide Energy for Industrialisation and Rapid Development. We will implement solutions with a sense of urgency to meet domestic needs for industry and domestic use and make Ghana a net exporter of power again in four years. To enable us achieve this objective, we will provide tax incentives to enable development of alternative sources of fuel and power ­ bio fuels and solar. We aim to ensure that the contribution from renewable sources of energy reaches in a decade, a minimum of 10% of what we need. We will harness our natural resources (particularly oil, gas, bio-gas, wind and solar) to ensure maximum benefit and prosperity for all Ghanaians.

VI.  Health and Environment:

Prevention is better than cure
The PPP will ensure a cleaner environment free from preventable diseases like malaria, cholera and guinea worm. We believe that just like countries in the Americas, Europe and elsewhere became malaria free, so can Ghana with the right leadership from the PPP. We will ensure emergency care throughout the country to save lives. Our focus will be in the area of prevention where education is the key. We are close to 60 years of independence, but we still suffer severely from the grip of preventable diseases. Preventable diseases rob our nation of an energetic workforce. This is not acceptable.

In fighting this menace, there is need to consider some other areas pivotal to the success of our agenda; paramount among them is the need to solve the problem of water supply to ensure clean water for every household and investment into public houses in order to do away with the slums. Public Health Nursing and Town Council functions will be back on the local government development agenda as we go for comprehensive decentralization.

We are aware that these will require huge investments that we must make if we want to permanently eradicate preventable diseases. As we have always said, transformation needs great minds and insightful leadership and the PPP insists that new policy initiatives like this one requires dynamic leaders who are capable of managing the challenges this transformational policy change will present.

Political leadership have been unable to use aggressive approaches in handling the menace ­ the last country wide spraying exercise for instance was in the 1960s. To reverse this trend, an aggressive and uncompromising attitude, a strong will and a decisive character is required to eradicate such preventable diseases as malaria and cholera from our country. Effective leadership; a sense of urgency in addressing issues that directly impact on human survival; and adequate education on preventable diseases and how they can be prevented are essential ingredients missing so far in the Fourth Republic. PPP is here to change that trend, when the electorate changes their choices at the November 7, polls.

VII.  Crime and Corruption:

The PPP will attack crime, the drug trade and corruption aggressively using leadership by example, being modest in government, passing and implementing the Right to Information Bill and ensuring an Independent Prosecutor's Office exists separate from the Ministry of Justice.

We will strengthen the Narcotics Control Board to make it the agency responsible for fighting the drug trade with all the human, financial and other resources needed for success. We will strengthen the Ghana Police Service by providing resources and training to enable them to manage the service effectively and efficiently, as well as stay ahead in the fight against crime.

VIII.  Ghanaians in the Diaspora:

The PPP will establish a Secretariat to cater for the needs of Ghanaians abroad and the African diaspora by June 30th 2017. Provide a support system to encourage re-entry, investment, safe and healthy vacations and transfer of knowledge and technology. We will ensure full citizenship rights to Ghanaians living abroad so that they can vote and serve in public sector positions. There is no justification whatsoever to deny our kith and kin such rights, when they pour into our economy huge sums of foreign exchange by way of remittances to family and friends.

IX.  Bringing the Economy Back Home:

Our economic policy will revolve around agriculture and the use of state purchasing power;

The PPP will use government's purchasing power to ensure that we eat what we grow and use what we produce in Ghana. We will improve Ghana's business climate to enable investment in job creation so that our people will stay at home to help develop the country and its economy. Instead of the corruption infested political gimmicks like giving out outboard motors and premix fuel, we will introduce and implement policies that yield to generation of aquatic abundance.

We will be relentless in providing support to Ghanaian industry and our farmers and fishermen using low interest loans, technical assistance, tax incentives and priority access to the Ghanaian market. To accelerate job creation nationally, an inter-region highway will be built with the same high quality throughout the country to open up the country for investment and development. In the same way, the PPP values the contribution railways can make to national development. We will implement with a sense of urgency plans to extend railways to the four corners of the country to facilitate the movement of goods and people.

X.  Jobs for Millions of Ghanaians:

Jobs for millions of Ghanaians are our goal. In the PPP administration there will be no Volta Ashanti or Northern region; or PPP jobs. We will provide jobs to go round every Ghanaian in every region simultaneously:

1. Ashanti Region:

Gold abounds in the Ashanti region and yet it does not serve as a source of mass employment. The PPP aims to promote the setting up of a gold refinery with its related factories for the manufacturing of jewellery and with government facilitation, attract international buyers to provide market and create jobs.

The PPP takes productivity seriously. Thousands of man hours are wasted traveling from Accra to Kumasi. This journey takes 5 hours on dangerous narrow roads. A new international airport will reduce strain on the Accra International Airport for air shipping of bulk haulage, and to take more dangerous articulated trucks off the roads. The Ashanti region would be the first to manufacture cars and bicycles. We will invest in a technical training centre to modernise the skills of the Suame artisans.

We will seek public private partnerships to establish a factory to produce cocoa sacks and footwear in the region and export these products to other countries in Africa.

2. Brong Ahafo:

The Bui Dam will be used to serve as a point for further development of industry in the region. Private companies such as Ghana Nuts Company will be supported to expand the processing of agricultural raw materials to create jobs. Mining companies in the region will be encouraged to become staging points for local small business development. Poultry and wood processing businesses will be given technical and financial support to serve the needs of the Ghanaian market. With regard to poultry farming, the state's purchasing power will be used to save the industry from collapse and push it to serve the needs of Ghanaians.

3. Central Region:

The Central region is the heartbeat of tourism in Ghana and the people will be made to feel it. The Museums and Monuments Board and the Tourism Authority will be empowered with the resources needed to realise the tourism potential of the region. The world heritage castles and forts would be restored to their original grandeur. World class fishing landing ports would be built within the first term. First class secondary schools would be expanded to take in more students both local and international. Fish processing companies would be established to handle excess fish during bumper periods. An airport, appropriately sized, to harness the tourism potential of the region will be developed. A PPP administration will aggressively promote through private public partnership fish and fruit processing factories in the region. For example, we will give priority to re-building a fruit processing plant at Asebu and make the fish processing facility in Elmina work.

4. Eastern Region:

The Eastern region is blessed with natural resources such as gold and bauxite, fertile farm land and is a timber producing area. We will harness the abundant water bodies in the Afram Plains and Kwahu lands to ensure large scale commercial farming to feed our people. We will show proper respect for the environment even as we seek to ensure that mining in the region leads to the development of local businesses.

5. Greater Accra:

This region is the hub of industry and commerce in Ghana but suffers from energy deficiency. The PPP will work to provide abundant energy to maximise productivity of industry in this region. We have more sunlight than the Chinese, more than the Europeans, more and more than America, and yet we do not manufacture solar panels. In four years, with technical assistance, we will be able to assemble solar panels in Accra.

Our performance at successive Olympic games, does not befit a country of our stature. We will build a state of the art Sports Centre in Accra with an Olympic size swimming training school along the coast. A unique feature of our plans includes expanding and cleaning up the water bodies in the Accra-Tema area to make them garbage free, mosquito free and prepare them to become leisure and recreational sites. This will include the development of the Old Fadama area into a first class park with gardens after the final resettlement of the current residents in a very humane manner. We will ensure the protection of the region's beaches and ocean front to secure homes and fishing communities.

We promise to ensure the resolution of property rights to free up the opportunity to develop large scale salt production in the region (Ada and its environs) with related processing plants. The PPP will single-mindedly use the powers of the state to make the pharmaceutical industry become a jewel for West Africa and beyond.

6. Northern Region:

The Mole Game Park of 25,000 acres would be fenced as has been done with Krueggar park in South Africa to prevent the animals from wandering to neighbouring countries. The Fufulso-Sawla road will be maintained as well as upgrading the feeder roads leading to the park. We will put in an airstrip and other infrastructure commensurate with its potential to rival game parks on the African continent. A six year development plan will be initiated to open up the forgotten areas of the region especially the stretch from Nankpanduri, Saboba, Chereponi, Zabzugu, Yendi, Salaga, Bimbilla, Wulensi connecting with Nkwanta in the Volta region.

The region's potential to become the breadbasket of the country with factories to process meat, maize, groundnuts, soya beans and mango will be developed. Due to this increased processing, during a PPP administration, there will be no need to import cooking oil.

7. Upper East:

A first class highway to link Bolga to Wa will be constructed to promote investment in the Upper East and Upper West regions. The trade corridor from Bawku, Garu, Tempane and Widana to Pusiga will be developed to serve as a hub for international commerce with Togo and Burkina Faso.

We will work towards bringing mechanized farming to facilitate mango and other fruit cultivation in this region. Large scale cattle ranches to enable meat processing will also be delivered.

8. Upper West:

The PPP insists on a high quality highway from Brong Ahafo through Upper West to Burkina Faso border to open up the region to investment. We will complete and modernise the University of Development Studies, Wa Campus. In addition, the Wa Polytechnic and Technical School will be modernised and re-equipped to serve the purpose.

We will promote the development of commerce between the region and Burkina Faso and build an international quality hospital that can attract patronage from Cote d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso

9. Volta Region:

The Aflao-Lome border post will be further upgraded along with other business/industrial parks in the area to serve as a regional trade hub, to facilitate job creation. The quality of the eastern corridor road linking the Volta and Northern regions will be improved. The PPP will fortify the beaches to preserve the fishing industry, save homes and communities from sea erosion and enhance the potential for tourism. We will support Ghanaian entrepreneurs to establish rice processing and fruit and vegetable canning industries in the Volta region. We will work with our neighbours to plan for rail lines to Nigeria to access their market of over 150 million people in that country alone.

Prospects of oil in the Keta basin and other areas in the region will be explored.

10. Western Region:

The PPP will reward the people of the Western region with infrastructure that complements its contribution to the nation. In particular, first class highways will connect Shama to Elubo to Enchi, Akontombra, Tarkwa, Bogoso, Prestea, Dadieso, Awaso and make travel to Dunkwa and Tarkwa much easier. Sekondi-Takoradi will once again become a proud railway hub. A PPP administration will re-develop Western region towns and cities beginning with the oil belt into modern, environmentally sound communities. The petrochemicals industry will be critical for the Western region. We will process gas and refine our crude oil to use its by-products produce bitumen, polyester, plastics and petroleum jelly. We will encourage oil and gas companies led by GNPC to relocate their headquarters offices to the Western Region.

The Western region will become a leader in the African biofuels industry. We would assist Ghanaians firms in the ownership and development of palm oil plantations. We will use science and technology to plant hybrid plants that mature in 17 months instead of 7 years. Countries like Australia have done it and we can do it here in Ghana if we work with a sense of urgency. We will stop the importation of palm oil to meet our needs domestically. Virgin Atlantic uses biofuel for its planes and in four years Ghanaian bio-fuel will fly our export products all over the world.

Chapter 5

Working Together

Unlike the other Ghanaian political parties, we are not selling an ideological mission to the Ghanaian people but rather practical solutions to the problems of our dear country. We believe in the Progressive way of thinking and we are Pragmatists. Ghanaians want food to eat, they want a home to live in, they want good health and safe roads, they want the best education for their children, and they want good jobs. We care about governance that works for all Ghanaian people and we will deliver all this. We care about creating jobs for Ghanaian people in Ghana. A new future beckons but it will not come into being unless we make a break from the old way of doing things ­ change our choices at the November polls.

We are saying that it is time to join hands and usher in a new, truly inclusive government led by the Progressive People's Party - a government where the best people, regardless of political affiliation are appointed to manage the affairs of our nation; a government that directly supports Ghanaian businesses to take over the local Ghanaian economy.

To make it happen, the PPP needs your vote to be able to deliver incorruptible leadership and a relentless war on state-sponsored corruption. What our experience in the 4th Republic has taught us is that we need a President who is by practical experience best suited for the job and who has demonstrated in his private life and in public service the ability to deliver positive results with a sense of urgency.

Our flag bearer, Dr. Papa Kwesi Nduom, "Edwumawura", we believe is the person most suited for the job of President of the Republic of Ghana come January 7th 2017. We recommend him; and all the PPP parliamentary candidates highly, for your votes.

Awake to Competent Leadership

Awake to Incorruptible Leadership

Awake to Education, Health and Jobs for Every Ghanaian!
