MANIFESTO OF THE CONVENTION PEOPLE'S PARTY
PREAMBLE We of the Convention People's Party (CPP) Conscious of the history of our people right from the dehumanizing European slave trade to the brutal and exploitative colonization and contemporary neocolonialism; Aware of the historic task imposed upon us as the legitimate political heirs of Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, the founder of our nation and great visionary and Pan Africanist; Recognizing our people's burning desire for economic independence and wellbeing, full employment, good health delivery, shelter, education and the pursuit of happiness in a free, peaceful and just society; And determined further to create a new socio-economic order that guarantees equal opportunity for all, ensuring that the welfare of our entire people irrespective of sex, religion, is the supreme concern of all; Resolved to attain state power through legitimate means based upon democratic principles for the purpose of establishing a government that rejects all forms of ethnicism, nepotism, elitism, and dictatorship and enthrones the principles of freedom, justice, accountability and competence as the guiding directives of good government; Resolved to guarantee for our entire people full and equal access to the judicious use of our natural resources for the establishment of conditions for social and economic justice, and for the material and spiritual well-being of every citizen; Do hereby adopt and affirm the following as the Manifesto and national agenda of our Party:

CHAPTER 1 
THE PEOPLE 1.1 The first national asset of any country is the People, who make their own history in the process of labouring to control and appropriate nature. The Convention People's Party shall therefore relate to the Ghanaian people drawn from across the length and breadth of our national territory, as productive beings and not as ethnic or racial entities. They shall constitute the resilient and ultimate base of all policies of the Party.
1.2 National development therefore shall have as its first and fundamental objective, the harnessing of the creative capabilities of our people for the purpose of constructing a new society based on commonly-driven concerns and the philosophy of one for all, all for one.
1.3 To this end, the Convention People's Party shall promote the cohesive development of all communities as homogeneous social units that will, through benefiting from the diversity that may characterize each segment, insist on the unity of all as a prerequisite for building a just society. In each Ghanaian community, no Ghanaian shall be designated a `stranger' or treated as such in his relationship to both socio-cultural institutions and to the means of productive labour.

1.4 The Convention People's Party shall enhance national unity by strenuously working at eliminating or reducing all conflicts and construct community programmes that will be built on the age-old Ghanaian principle of consensus. 1.5 The Convention People's Party shall strive to instill the spirit of nationalism and patriotism in all its people by promoting the deep sense of national pride that witnessed the birth of our motherland.
 
CHAPTER 2 
ECONOMY
2.1 A government of the Convention People's Party shall dedicate itself to the liquidation of underdevelopment and dependency, which will be predicated on a struggle for the radical structural disengagement of the country from the exploitative orbit of the present international economic order and globalization.
While recognizing the exceptional circumstances which led to the introduction of the Economic Recovery Programme and the subsequent social and economic sacrifices that it has exacted on the Ghanaian people, a CP government shall as an ultimate objective explore, in active collaboration with like-minded countries, alternative programmes. Programmes that are directed towards the structural transformation of the entire national economy which will have the capacity to meet the basic needs of the national population and raising the economy's low productive capacity.
2.3 In this connection, a government of the Convention People's Party will promote the building of a self-reliant national economy that will be run and managed in the interest of Ghanaians.
2.4 A government of the Convention People's Party while recognizing the role of private capital, will promote the vigorous development of the state sector, joint ventures and cooperatives.
2.5 A government of the CPP will work to accelerate the fruition of the ideals of a full African economic integration of which ECOWAS is a stepping stone.
2.6 A CPP government shall strive to move Ghana away from the role of a rawmaterial producing country by encouraging the establishment of secondary industries.
2.7 Under a Convention People's Party government the state's role will be an active prime mover of growth and development with the objective of meeting the needs and aspirations of all Ghanaians.
2.8 A Convention People's Party government will promote economic development in a manner which ensure a healthy and sustainable environment.

2.9 The CPP recognizes that investment can help accelerate growth if it is properly directed to the priority areas of the national economy including research and development. We would work as an active partner with the private sector to ensure increased investment in industry, research and development. We recognize that it is imperative to harness changing technology to secure jobs which are more productive and better paid.
In the international sphere, our management of the national currency will ensure both stability and exchangeability. We shall also provide adequate and appropriate protection for domestic industries as we curb wanton dumping of foreign imports, from countries which will themselves protect their markets against our products. Our government shall bridge the gap between various income groups and institute a tax system which will be fair especially to the underprivileged sections of the Ghanaian society.

CHAPTER 3 
AGRICULTURE
3.1 Agriculture shall remain the cornerstone of the national economy with the objectives of achieving self-sufficiency in food production as well as ensuring the production of raw materials for agro-industrialisation.
3.2 The peasantry constitute the overwhelming majority of all agricultural producers. Agrarian transformation programmes of a CPP government shall therefore revolve around them.
3.3 It is inconceivable that Ghanaian agriculture can be permanently transformed without the peasant's effective exercise of political and economic power. The policy of a CPP government in this connection shall be that of a progressive reorientation towards the peasant majority in which they shall have a say in the disposition of the products of their labour power, in resource allocation to the agriculture sector, and therefore, in broad decision-making, especially as it affects their lives at all levels.
3.4 A CPP government shall also address the purely technical problems that constrain Ghanaian agriculture. A vigorous policy shall therefore be pursued in infrastructural development such as the construction of small scale irrigation schemes, rural feeder roads, clinics, schools, organic fertilizer plants, storage facilities as well as the provision of judicious mechanization and appropriate marketing facilities. Extension services and benefits of research findings and easy credit facilities shall also be provided to farmers in all sectors of agriculture.
3.5 A government of the CPP shall continue to: I) pay realistic and fair prices to cocoa producers whilst ensuring that the cocoa farmer is not returned to the clutches of the cocoa broker as was experienced in the colonial era. ii) Intensify efforts at diversifying the country's agricultural export base into such areas as the sheanut

industry and the so-called non-traditional export commodities. Intensify investment in the processing of agricultural produce to stabilize the incomes of farmers and also maximize our national earnings.
INDUSTRY, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
4.1 The CPPs philosophy on industrialization science and technology is anchored on the need to debunk the racist exclusivism on matters of technology, and to forcefully articulate that it was the inherent functioning of the colonial system and its logic, which deliberately generated the technological backwardness of our people, which still lingers on till this day.
4.2 A government of the CPP deems industrialization not only necessary for economic development but also crucial to social transformation, and shall therefore make it a central focus in Ghana's development programmes.
4.3 A CPP government shall pursue a vigorous national policy in the development and use of science and technology, bearing in mind that the real alternative technological strategy for Ghana is the development of indigenous technology and the active encouragement of traditional artisan technology to systematically supplement modern technology.
4.4 MINERALS AND NATURAL RESOURCES i) Though the Convention People's Party will fully support the policy of opening up the mining sector to foreign and local investment and exploitation, it is our firmly held view that mineral resources as a national patrimony should not be wantonly exploited to the point of exhausting them. Controlled exploitation therefore not only will guarantee adequate prices overseas, but also make sure that we do not return to the predatory conditions that characterized the industry when we were colonial subjects.
ii) Environmental concerns make control of exploitation of all minerals a vital matter of national policy.
iii) The pattern of colonial investment in Africa with the exception of South Africa, was characterized by extraction, and not industrialization, and was patterned to ensure the transfer of economic surplus from the colonies to the colonial metropolis. Under a Convention People's Party government therefore, the mining sector shall be encouraged to promote linkage industries that will produce not only the appropriate technology in the sector, but extend its interest to the refining of exploited minerals.

CHAPTER 4 
4.5 TOURISM
A Convention People's Party government shall launch a major national and international tourist promotion programme and make the tourist industry a major foreign exchange earner. Internationally the government of the CPP shall establish in each of our missions a tourist office that shall closely work with travel agencies and tourist companies.
It shall also encourage investment in the tourist sector specifically to increase hotel accommodation facilities and enhance recreational sites. In pursuance of this objective, strict measures shall be instituted to forestall some unacceptable aspects of international tourism, while at the same time providing a protective and secure environment for overseas visitors who wish to experience our vibrant national culture and enjoy our proverbial hospitality.
Internally, tourism will be promoted among the people to achieve the following objectives: i) boost the sense of nationhood and national integration. ii) vigorously promote the African personality as a means o debunking the racist perception of Africa and the African. iii) promote general entertainment and expose the people to the natural beauty and endowments of the country. iv) serve as a means of economic development which shall open up more employment opportunities to our people.
4.5 ENERGY A Convention Party administration will continue the present policy of energy conservation, by encouraging the use of gas (Liquefied Petroleum Gas), and enhancing prospecting for oil and gas, and harnessing traditional sources such as hydro and solar energy for domestic use. We shall also expand the national domestic generation capacity in order to increase electricity output to meet increasing national demand and to assist neighbouring countries in their energy requirements. The use of the Tano Basin Gas reserves for power generation and linking up with the Akosombo-Kpong hydro Complex will continue to be a national priority as a source of energy for the national electrification programme and for export.
4.6 LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT i) A Convention People's Party government will produce a comprehensive training and employment policy that is linked up with a national development strategy in all sectors of the economy with concentration on the development and acquisition of skills, through the use of technology.
ii) Equal opportunity in employment shall be guaranteed for all regardless of sex, with emphasis on inducting more women and people from underprivileged segments into the formal sector of the economy.
iii) We shall guarantee the promotion of employment opportunities in the rural areas through assisting growth in infrastructure investment in electricity, water, roads and communication so as to eventually eliminate the gross disparity between rural and urban areas.

iv) We shall work in the interest of the trade union movement of Ghana and support free trade union activities within the framework of labour-supporting laws.
v) Re-orient the Social Security and National Insurance Trust (SSNIT) to play its full expected role as the major actor in the welfare sector.

CHAPTER 5 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
5.1 The Convention Party holds the firm conviction that real democracy stems from local initiative which engenders the spirit of voluntarism and communal effort,. In its avowed aim to ensure rapid growth and development of the rural communities, a Convention Party government will:
i) Introduce a system of decentralized planning and administration and a financial machinery which will enable the people to participate in decision-making at the local level, the nucleus of political authority.
ii) Continue and improve the implementation of the District Assembly concept and make the District Assembly truly the highest political authority in the district. Review existing laws on District Assemblies with a view to allowing political parties to play an active role in their affairs.
Iv) Provide good infrastructure such as roads, food storage facilities, water, electricity and markets. v) Open job avenues through the development of cottage industries in the rural areas to reduce the levels of rural poverty.
CHAPTER 6 
HEALTH The Convention People's Party firmly believes that health is a fundamental human right, the pivot of social and economic progress and a worthy and beneficial social goal. An individual or community is in good health when there is complete physical, social and mental well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. With this belief, the Convention Party:
i) Commits itself to the building of a nation where every citizen shall have the right to adequate health care
ii) Shall promote the concept of HEALTH FOR ALL GHANAIANS through a sustained implementation of the Primary Health Care Programme and a programmed improvement of all healthy facilities.
iv) Encourage private individuals and corporate bodies and voluntary organizations to establish more health centres and facilities, supplementary to government efforts.

v) Provide adequate incentives for medical and paramedical workers especially those in the rural areas.
vi) Promote the local manufacture of drugs and equipment as well as encourage the development of traditional medicine.
vii) Family Planning A CPP government will provide facilities for secure and healthy family planning practices as well as intensify education for the effective implementation of the policy in order to ensure a happier life for all families. The CPP policy is anchored on the firm conviction that education is the key to the advancement of society and a means of preparing the people to assume their social responsibilities.
7.2 To this end, our Party, considering education as the birth right of every citizen and the cardinal social objective instrument for achieving national goals, and for the promotion of democracy, social well-being and peace, shall ensure
i) high quality relevant education is available to all Ghanaian citizens irrespective of ethnic origin, religious background or sex.
ii) education is directed at training citizens to function in roles that lead to increased national wealth. that:
iii) there is a review of the present Educational Reform Programme by eliminating such weaknesses that have hampered it up to date, and also ensure that all public schools will be fairly funded and shall be accountable to their local communities.
iii) reduce the burden of the cost of education for the parent or guardian by continuing the present free tuition system, and also expand the national scholarship programme to help gifted students from poor backgrounds.
iv) reorganize technical and vocational education with emphasis on the training of middle-level technical manpower;
(v) give special attention to university education, by encouraging the universities to shed the ivory-tower image and providing them with the necessary facilities that will enable them to become the focal points of community and national development.
vi) Link education to productive activity.

vii) provide universities with adequate infrastructural facilities through state and private initiatives to enable them to absorb the growing number of qualified entrants who otherwise would not have access to university education.
(viii) intensify programmes for distance education at the university level, as well as draw on inexpensive technology to multiply the effect of teachers, and to 
CHAPTER 7 
Reach students who will be benefiting from education while at the same time participating productively in the economic life of the society.
(viii) The CPP shall, in line with the original national education policy initiated by Kwame Nkrumah, intensify mass education and literacy programmes.

CHAPTER 8 
HOUSING
8.1 this sector has suffered great neglect over the years. The Party's broad policy in this sector will be to:
i) encourage the expansion of the local building materials industry and the application of local housing technologies in the expansion of the housing stock.
ii) provide access to funding and other financial arrangements for housing sector financing.
iii) encourage all enterprises to evolve housing schemes for their employees.
iv) promote house ownership by every Ghanaian family alongside the provision of more rental units at affordable cost.

CHAPTER 9 
ENVIRONMENT
The Convention People's Party Government will strengthen the existing Environmental Protection .The EPA supported by legislation, will have the full power to:
i) Establish a clear-cut policy on the environment.

ii) Provide the institutional framework for monitoring all issues pertaining to the environment, including mounting public education for all communities and institutions.
iii) Monitor on regular basis all violations of regulations concerning the environment, particularly those pertaining to the production and dumping of chemical and industrial waste, the pollution of the air, water and the damage of land and shorelines through indiscriminate exploitation of resources and the uncontrolled disposal of waste.
iv) Liaise with the Ministry of Health to educate the public on the disposal of human waste and the management of such waste as not to become a health hazard.
v) Harmonize national policy on the environment with the UN Conference on Environment and Development and other international agencies devoted to the environment.
vi) Receive adequate support from state and non-governmental organizations in order to create an adequate national environmental programme throughout all segments of the national community.

CHAPTER 10 
TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION
Recognizing the importance of transport and communication to national development, a Convention People's Party administration:
i) shall give priority to the provision of cheap, safe and reliable transport and communication system;
ii) expand and modernize the existing modes of transportation, namely road, rail, water and air;
iii) develop, expand and maintain our extensive network of feeder roads to provide easy access to food and other economic goods producing areas;
iv) provide an efficient and reliable modern communication network that will link up all parts of the country.

v) aim to ensure that Ghana has a modern and efficient rail system which will give impetus to productive activity and facilitate the easy and cheap movement of people and goods.
12 YOUTH, SPORTS AND CULTURE
i) It shall be the policy of the Convention People's Party to mold the character of the youth for nation building, and further mobilize and motivate them for national service and future leadership.
ii) Recognizing the importance of sports in national development and in forming a vigorous international relationship, the Party shall give sports a pride of place in its national culture policy by encouraging the construction of fields and stadia in all districts, and above all, help to promote a sporting goods industry that will provide a major impetus to the development of sports.
iii) The nurturing of a viable and unifying national culture that links up the best in the various ethnic cultures into a progressive and dynamic national culture, shall be the major concern of a Convention People's Party administration.
12.1. The Convention People's Party, conscious of the fact that women continue to be widely discriminated against both in the home and society at large, will promote the elimination of all acts of gender discrimination so that women can be fully involved in social, political and economic life.
12.2 By recognizing the special status of women arising out of years of discrimination, the CPP will support affirmative action for women in all relevant areas of national development.

CHAPTER 13 
CHIEFTAINCY
The CPP shall adhere to the provisions of the Constitution pertaining to the institution of chieftaincy by ensuring that it becomes a vital part of the new democratic culture of the country as well as play its part in national development. A CPP government will encourage the review of the outmoded chieftaincy practices which inhibit democratic expression.

CHAPTER 14 
CIVIL AND PUBLIC SERVICE 14.1 The objectives of the Convention People's Party will be the development of an efficient dedicated public service that is motivated by a high sense of patriotism and a deep sense of duty.

CHAPTER 15 
 JUDICIARY 14.2 And in pursuance of the decentralization concept, promote the district assembly programme as central to the creation of a devoted national and local government administration throughout the country in the cause of accelerating development, selfsufficiency and enhancing the standard of living of all communities through efficient administration.
On all questions pertaining to the Judiciary and the administration of justice, the Party shall adhere scrupulously to the provisions of the Constitution. Conscious of the fact that justice delayed is justice denied, the Convention Party government shall provide all facilities to improve the efficiency and good administration of the judicial service thereby enhancing the efficient and expeditious delivery of justice. In pursuing these ends, the Convention People's Party shall initiate action for the review of all laws which inhibit the freedoms enshrined in the constitution and take steps to ensure that all existing laws conform to the spirit and letter of the Constitution.
CHAPTER 16 
DEFENCE AND SECURITY 16.1. The defence policy of the CPP government shall be based on the fundamental role of the Armed Forces in national defence and the maintenance of law and order which are necessary conditions for sustained growth and development. In this connection, the CP shall pursue a policy that would ensure respect for the Constitution of Ghana at all times, as well as facilitate the fulfillment of the envisaged role of the Armed Forces.
16.2 The CPP recognizes the woefully under-equipped and unmotivated Ghana Police Force and shall seek to address these inadequacies in order to make it capable of effectively carrying out its assigned duties relating to the maintenance of law and order and the provision of security.
16.3 Consequently, a government of the CPP shall strive to ensure:
i) the modernization of the Ghana Army, Air Force, Navy the Ghana Police Force and other security agencies to make them effective and combat-ready at all times.
ii) that the general welfare and happiness of both serving and retired service personnel are guaranteed;
iii) that promotion is based solely on merit;
v) take appropriate measures to establish the awareness that national defence and security are not the duty of the uniformed services only but the concern of all adult citizens.

16.4 The Prison Service: A CPP government will strive to provide the necessary resources and attention to the Ghana Prison Service, and to ensure that the prison system is humane. In the meantime, all efforts will be made to protect the social rights of the Ghanaian people and minimize the incidents where lawful citizens are pushed into criminal behaviour because they are denied a legitimate means of livelihood.
 
CHAPTER 17 
FOREIGN RELATIONS
In accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the Pan Africanist philosophy of the Party's forebears, the Convention Party shall:
i) pursue a foreign policy based on mutual co-existence of states through bilateral and multi-lateral agreements;
ii) observe all conventions and obligations with regional and other international organizations;
iii) vigorously promote all programmes designed to achieve African unity and integration;
iv) maintain and strengthen Ghana's membership of the OAU, ECOWAS, UNO, NAM and the ACP among others; and the developing world for the promotion of South/South Cooperation as a major force in the fight against imperialism neocolonialism, neo-fascism ,racism and all forms of oppression, in solidarity with oppressed peoples all over the world;
vii) steadfastly uphold and enhance the spirit of Pan Africanism which was kindled by Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, with the ultimate aim of unifying all peoples of African descent and promoting the concept of African Personality among the comity of Nations.
viii) actively promote co-operation with all democratically established governments for the mutual benefit of the peoples and further enhance the prospects for world peace, social justice, economic well-being, the rule of law and the guarantee of fundamental human rights and the pursuit of happiness.

CHAPTER 18

The Convention People's Party, reborn at a critical juncture of our nation's history, represents an important historical segment of the progressive nationalist forces. We are keenly aware of our responsibilities as a Party. Our choices are clear. We are opposed to elitism, and intellectual arrogance. We oppose the politics that seeks to marginalize the broad masses of the people, and oppress them. We are opposed to privilege as the determinant factor in the national decision making process.
Above all, we are opposed to imperialism, racism, neocolonialism and exploitation. We stand for the brotherhood of man, for freedom, justice and accountability.
We stand for peace and national stability. We stand for national unity and development.
End of manifesto

